



Discussion of
Draft Recommendations

Daniel Hungerford opened the final session of the conference by
outlining the group's ultimate task-to create research
recommendations from conference deliberations. Before the
conference, he and Daniel Pollock drafted recommendations for the
steering committee to consider. During the conference, the steering
committee modified those recommendations, and they were distributed
to attendees for general discussion.
Hungerford stated that the goal of the conference was not to
achieve unanimity regarding the recommendations, but to have
significant and general agreement. He indicated the process would
be to discuss the recommendations one by one, identifying any gaps
or omissions and offering general comments. He emphasized that the
sequence of the recommendations did not imply a priority order.
Because the published recommendations will include supporting text,
he encouraged the group to consider any points of clarification
that would be instructive. Hungerford then opened the floor for
discussion.
Recommendation #1 Research on screening and intervention should
address the full spectrum of alcohol problems among ED
patients.
Richard Brown remarked that in many circles, "intervention" does
not necessarily include referral, so he suggested that the first
recommendation include "referral." Also, he said the phrase
"alcohol problems" does not always include risky drinking and
problem drinking, so he suggested adding "risky and problem
drinking" to the recommendation.
Daniel Hungerford noted that the supporting text could provide
detail on the spectrum of alcohol problems. He suggested the main
point of the first recommendation was that research efforts should
include the whole continuum of alcohol problems, not just a portion
of the continuum such as alcohol-dependent drinkers.
Jean Shope advocated that the definition of "the full spectrum
of alcohol problems" include primary prevention. She recommended
this under-standing be made explicit in the final document.
Gordon Smith suggested that the recommendations should address
the problems of poly-substance abuse.
Carl Soderstrom wondered whether "alcohol problems" referred to
the spectrum of drinking problems or the medical problems
associated with drinking.
Herman Diesenhaus pointed out that hazardous drinking causes a
complex set of problems that include personal, social, and legal
problems in addition to medical problems. The phrase "alcohol
problems" includes all those problems as well as the hazardous
drinking. He noted that different pieces of the solution will lie
in the medical realm and in the social welfare realm. He expressed
concern about how to reflect this complexity in the
recommendations.
Guohua Li suggested changing the phrase "among ED patients" to
"in the emergency setting" because alcohol problems are not limited
to patients. Perhaps the recommendations should address alcohol
problems among providers and physicians.
Stephen Hargarten thought that the term "alcohol-related
problems" would appeal to clinicians more than "alcohol problems"
because they see those problems in their practices. He said that
including "related" in terms gives the sense of broadening
them.
Richard Ries said he did not believe that screening for alcohol
neuropathy was intended to be part of the recommendation. He
suggested that the recommendation be clear that it is addressing
alcohol use disorders or problems, not for medical care
consequences.
Hungerford replied that screening for specific medical care
consequences was not part of the recommendation, but that
consequence items may be used in the screening. He added that broad
screening would identify people with medical conditions as well. He
found that
screening with a low cut point on the AUDIT identified more
people with severe alcohol problems and alcohol dependence than did
not using a uniform screening method. He agreed that this issue
needs clarification in this recommendation.
Richard Longabaugh said that the term "alcohol problems" implies
that the patient's problem is consumption. He favored
"alcohol-related problems" because consumption is not the problem.
The problem is the consequences resulting from excessive
drinking.
Elinor Walker endorsed the notion of using "the emergency care
setting" rather than "the ED" particularly to include focus on the
pre-hospital care setting.
Hungerford added that the trauma care setting should be included
as well.
Li added his support to "alcohol-related problems," but
suggested another alternative, "problem drinking," which is
commonly used.
Edward Bernstein pointed out that the recommendations would
likely stand alone for readings and come without context. With that
in mind, he suggested listing the full spectrum of alcohol
problems, from risky drinking to alcohol abuse to alcohol
dependency. He felt that it would be a mistake to open this set of
research recommendations with a recommendation that included
screening for withdrawal or other conditions. Another possibility
would be to say, "the full spectrum of alcohol misuse."
Recommendation #2 Screening instruments under consideration for
use in EDs should be evaluated as a component of protocols that
provide interventions for patients.
Robert Woolard supported the recommendation and noted that most
research on screening has involved an evaluation of screening, but
not an intervention. Trying to apply those findings to a
clinical
setting, where there is the question of training and the link
between the screening instruments and the intervention, becomes
problematic. Enough research has been conducted on instruments
alone, he said, and new research should link screens with
interventions.
Linda Degutis recommended amending the recommendation to read,
"screening, interventions, and methods under consideration." Then
in the supporting text, she suggested addressing the different
people who might be doing the screening and the need to tie it to
intervention.
Longabaugh wondered whether the intended consumers of the
document would include government officials, researchers,
practitioners, and academicians.
Hungerford answered that the summary of the conference would be
published in an emergency medicine journal and that readers would
include these groups.
Daniel Pollock added that the message of the recommendations
could also be conveyed at professional meetings. The goal was to
influence people who are in a position to make changes in the
field.
Brown believed the recommendation was worded too strongly. To
him, it was saying that work should not include screening research
in isolation. He noted that little is known about effective
screening for certain sub-populations, so screening research still
has its place. Although he agreed that a total research portfolio
should have a strong emphasis on intervention and not just
screening.
Diesenhaus described his use of a slogan and abbreviation for a
treatment strategy, "Screening, Brief Intervention, and
Referral-SBIR." Research on the individual components is important,
but the strategy for the emergency room setting is as follows:
screen, decide if a brief intervention is called for, and if not,
give a referral. Emergency setting personnel need to understand all
three components and how they are linked. He was not sure if
"referral" could be included every time, but acknowledged that it
is a vital part of the work.
Hungerford emphasized that research on screening is needed.
However, he believed research on screening instruments that is not
linked with an intervention leads to the easy assumption that
results will be generalizable to using that screening instrument in
a full protocol. The second recommendation, therefore, is intended
to point out that results from the screening literature are not
necessarily generalizable to real-world settings in which screening
would be paired with interventions.
Ries suggested that defining "SBIR" upfront might help
clinicians understand the recommendations better. If we do not, a
clinician who is interested in seizures or pancreatitis could
easily misread the wording of this recommendation. To avoid that,
for this recommendation we would have to say something like,
"Problematic alcohol-use screening instruments under consideration
for use in the ED should be evaluated as a component of protocols
that provide alcohol-use interventions for patients to decrease
problems or use."
Hungerford said he understood. If we do not pre-define "SBIR,"
we have to define what we are talking about with each
recommendation. If we do define "SBIR" upfront, we make the reading
more understandable and more efficient.
Gail D'Onofrio noted that in this context, we use "referral" to
mean sending a patient to a specialized treatment facility.
However, in emergency medicine, everyone gets a referral-to primary
care, a clinic follow-up, or another health or social service. The
"referral" in SBIR could include both meanings.
Hargarten's initial understanding of this recommendation was
that screening activities for alcohol problems should be integrated
with the screening and interventions the ED does for a whole range
of problems. He suggested that the recommendation be worded in such
a manner that this effort does not seem to be a parallel
activity.
Hungerford proposed that just as screening research should be
carried out in the context of protocols that include interventions,
those protocols should be integrated with the whole system of ED
operations.
Christopher Dunn thought the word "evaluate" made this
recommendation vague. What would be evaluated-the usefulness of a
screen or the psychometric properties of a screen? He believed that
the screen can have an interventive effect, so he wanted research
on whether patients fare as well with a screen as they do with
brief advice or more sophisticated techniques.
David Fiellin advocated eliminating the second recommendation.
To him the statement implied that screening instruments should be
evaluated only as a component of protocols that provide
interventions. He believed that the statement was dangerous because
there are research methodologies that are related to evaluating
screening and separate ones related to evaluating interventions,
and we may not want to obligate tying the two together.
Thomas Babor supported technical research on screening and the
wording of this recommendation. However, he raised a larger
issue-the moral imperative of screening. He said that screening
sets up the expectation that something has to follow. Without
screening, there cannot be much intervention. He noted that the
recommendation could be seen as a way of driving widespread
applications of interventions. If that is the goal, he thought we
should be examining how to accomplish screening. There are large
obstacles to screening, and practical research on screening
implementation, incentives, efficiency, and its ability to reach
large numbers of people at low cost is necessary. He believed in a
public health approach to screening which means we would not do it
if the yield is low. He suggested that the technical aspects of
screening were not as fruitful topics for research as how to screen
the greatest number of patients at the lowest cost.
Bernstein suggested that the recommendation not be eliminated,
but rewritten to reflect the discussion.
Pollock and Hungerford concurred. Hungerford added that the
intent of the recommendation was not so much that integrating the
screen with the intervention gave better estimates of the
performance characteristics of the screen, but that it would
redress the imbalance between
research emphasizing the performance characteristics and
research on operational and practical characteristics.
Recommendation #3 Interventions that have shown promise in other
clinical settings should be adapted to and evaluated in emergency
departments.
Charles Bombardier wondered whether the recommendation should
limit evaluation only to interventions shown to be effective in
other settings. There might be interventions developed specifically
for the ED that would be worthwhile to test.
Walker thought the goal of this recommendation was to
de-emphasize fine-grained, developmental work and to emphasize
pursuing work using available interventions.
Woolard noted that the effectiveness of screening, brief
interventions, and referrals has been proven outside the emergency
department, but not yet in the ED. Therefore, he hoped that the
supporting text for this recommendation would include statements
about the need for a large, multi-center trial in EDs.
Longabaugh noted that new and creative interventions may be
developed in the ED that the rest of the field will want to adapt
and explore.
Walker made a plea not to adopt the abbreviation "SBIR" because
it is already used to designate small business innovation research
grants by federal agencies. It could be very confusing. She
suggested "SIR" instead.
Smith returned to the idea of linking alcohol interventions with
the other interventions in the ED. If there were a package of
interventions that providers could document and be reimbursed for,
that would ease acceptance by practitioners and help
institutionalize these new practices. Documentation would also help
ensure interventions would not be repeated unnecessarily.
Pollock pointed out that proving the cost-effectiveness of a
specified, well-described service in a clinical setting is a
critical consideration in moving a new practice from a research
endeavor to a reimbursable service. Whether the service emerges as
an adaptation from primary care or as an innovation from the ED is
less important than whether it can be evaluated to the satisfaction
of those who make key decisions about whether it becomes part of
standard practice.
Larry Gentilello asserted that effective treatments already
exist, not just treatments that "hold promise." The "promise" has
to do with the intervention's likelihood of success in the ED, not
with its success in other settings. He suggested that the wording
be made less tentative: for example, "treatments that work should
be made to work in the ED."
Catherine Gordon proposed that the recommendations address the
issue of financing and suggested the following phrase, "Research
should also identify the most effective and cost-effective
interventions and delivery mechanisms (e.g., provider types or
technologies)." She said this type of information is absolutely
critical for insurers.
Pollock asked Gordon whether research on alcohol interventions
had to be done in a specific clinical setting in order for
interventions provided in that setting to qualify for
reimbursement. He also asked how Medicare distinguishes between
prevention and treatment for the purposes of authorizing
reimbursement.
Gordon explained that because Medicare is prohibited by statute
from covering preventive services, it must draw a distinction
between treatment and prevention. The kind of information insurers
require to cover these services includes necessary frequency of
treatment, types of providers best suited to provide treatment, an
ironclad case that the intervention is effective, a consensus in
the professional community around the intervention, and an ability
to guard against the potential for fraud and abuse.
Pollock added the notion that demonstrations of effectiveness in
primary care settings, in the eyes of policymakers and payers, are
not tantamount to demonstrating cost-effectiveness in emergency
departments, underscoring the importance of research in that
setting.

Gordon agreed.
Recommendation #4 Research is needed to evaluate the effects of
legal, privacy, confidentiality, regulatory, and human subjects
issues on screening and interventions for alcohol problems among ED
patients.
Brown praised the recommendation for addressing a very important
issue. However, he thought the human subjects aspect might not
belong, because human subjects issues will not affect screening and
intervention on a daily basis in the clinical setting. They only
affect research studies.
Bombardier suggested that in addition to evaluation, this
research should develop ways to mitigate legal, privacy, and
confidentiality problems associated with screening and
treatment.
Ann Mahoney said the recommendation should be worded to focus on
systems as well as individuals. For example, she indicated that the
concerns institutional and professional systems have about
reimbursement or legal, privacy, and confidentiality issues
influence whether ED patients receive screening and
interventions.
Hargarten commented that this area has the potential to cause
consternation and divisiveness, so it will require a great deal of
textual commentary to tease out the important issues that it
addresses. He noted that alcohol screening in the ED is currently
being discussed on the "ethics circuit." He suggested that perhaps
ethics should be added to the recommendation.
Recommendation #5 Research is needed on how demographic and
cultural attributes of ED patients, practitioners, and
interventionists influence the success of screening and
interventions for alcohol problems.
Hargarten said there should be some reference in the
recommendations to the high-risk environment in which these people
live and work and visit the ED. He wondered if this recommendation
was the appropriate place.
Marilyn Sommers noted that different clinical settings can
profoundly influence how screening and intervention is delivered.
She cited differences between Level I trauma centers and community
hospitals. She suggested that the influence of setting be made
explicit somewhere in the recommendations.
Alison Moore indicated that these differences can also influence
how researchers and clinicians tailor interventions to apply to
people with different cultural attributes.
Li suggested that co-morbidity or patients' medical
characteristics could also have a large impact on the success of
interventions.
Recommendation #6 Research is needed to identify the factors
that foster the organizational and practitioner behavior changes
needed to institutionalize screening and intervention for alcohol
problems among ED patients.
Walker urged that this research not be confined to academic
medical centers, but be designed and carried out in partnerships
with other stakeholders, particularly community-level providers.
She believed that this should be in the recommendation, not just
supporting text, because reviewers would want to know how screening
and intervention can be implemented into clinical practice when
considering grant applications.
Robert Lowe suggested a range of research topics could come
under this recommendation. Who should do interventions in the ED?
How should ED interventions be linked to the primary care and
public health systems? Which services should be provided in the ED
and which should be provided elsewhere? How can referrals be
effectively accomplished? How can interventions be paid for? He
suggested wording for the supporting text for this recommendation.
"Research in this category may address a broad range of
organizational issues-from the structure of alcohol and screening
treatment services within the ED to the relationship of the ED to
other sources of primary care and the organizational and fiscal
factors affecting that relationship. This research is crucial as
the field progresses from evaluating efficacy in research settings
to examining effectiveness in the current, complex health care
delivery system."
Babor supported Lowe's revision and suggested adding the word
"implementation" to the recommendation. Research is needed on how
to implement and institutionalize these programs. Factors to be
explored range from practitioner behavior and practice guidelines
to policy changes that are needed to facilitate implementation of
screening and intervention in these settings. If this
recommendation is too narrowly defined, we will encourage people to
look at small things like training programs. However, no matter how
strong a training program is, if there are no incentives for
practitioners to use the training or the legal restrictions are
insurmountable or the health care system is in total chaos and you
cannot find who is in charge of the department because somebody has
bought out the hospital, you will have difficulty implementing an
intervention.
Peter Rostenberg noted that most trauma care is delivered in
community hospitals, and practitioners in that setting often do not
relate to Level I trauma care research. Therefore, he supported
including community hospitals in research efforts. He thought the
biggest barrier was how to change the culture in the ED so that
staff would ask screening questions.
Ries thought that the recommendations should encourage studying
outcomes that are important to medical personnel, such as health
care outcomes and recidivism, rather than alcohol use outcomes.
Hargarten related that a recent survey found that almost
one-third of academic EDs have faculty in community settings. He
thought that encouraging this linkage in research proposals could
help increase this proportion. He also suggested that involving
opinion leaders in the field of emergency medicine could help
reduce the lag time between academic research showing the
effectiveness of an intervention and broad implementation in
non-academic, clinical settings.
Patricia Perry believed that the recommendation was not yet
comprehensive. Hospital administrators merit mention because they
are key to wide implementation. She thought state and federal
policymakers should also be included in the statement. She observed
that institutionalizing new practices was just the beginning of the
task. Once they are in place, the program needs to be maintained.
She wondered what factors influenced maintenance.
Pat Lenaghan suggested that clinicians need recommendations
about what could be accomplished now. They need to know that
screening works and that the sooner screening is implemented the
sooner patients with alcohol problems can receive help. She noted
that collaboration with community groups and public health agencies
is appropriate for alcohol problems because they are not just
present in the ED. She said that such collaboration has contributed
to the success of domestic violence screening across the
country.
Bombardier noted that barriers exist among departments within
institutions as well as among institutions. He advocated developing
information systems that follow patients so that data collected in
the ED can be used later.
Ronald Maio suggested defining the unique role of the emergency
department in the overall picture of treating alcohol problems.
What can the emergency department do that cannot be done in other
settings?
Soderstrom suggested that the term "practitioner" in this
recommendation needs to be clarified because it can mean anyone who
takes care of a patient, including RNs, MDs, therapists, and
others.
Bernstein noted that alcohol-dependent patients clearly need
specialized treatment and that some patients with hazardous
drinking need out-patient counseling. He said if access to that
counseling is not available, screening and interventions are less
likely to happen in the ED. He called for research on barriers
emergency physicians face in getting further care for ED patients
with alcohol problems.
Hargarten wondered about supporting text that calls for
policy-relevant research to institutionalize and to promote
organizational changes. He suggested that research on ways of
paying for these services could be an important factor in promoting
and institutionalizing changes.
Recommendation #7 Research is needed to explore and define the
role of information technology in facilitating screening and
intervention for alcohol problems among ED patients.
Brown asked whether other forms of technology should be
included, such as audio tape headsets.
Janet Williams suggested the phrase "information and
communication technology." She said that these technologies can
assist in follow-up and continuity of care.
Ries commented that educational videos in waiting rooms can be
helpful.
Hargarten added that tele-medicine has a role in making the
booster intervention a reality.
Recommendation #8 Funding agencies should support research on
screening and interventions for alcohol problems among ED patients
and make the mechanisms of research supportknown to potential
applicants in emergency medicine.
Longabaugh wanted the recommendation to include research
training as an explicit component. He said that it has been
difficult to get good, physician applicants for Brown's
post-doctoral program in intervention and treatment research.
However, the program has produced a great deal of research.
Mechanisms to facilitate the training of good researchers,
particularly ones from emergency medicine, are needed and should be
encouraged.
Hargarten added that training mechanisms should not be limited
to physicians. He suggested including nurses and PhDs.
Diesenhaus noted that agencies are required to fund different
types of research. SAMHSA funds applied research, and their
application pro-gram is oversubscribed.
Brown felt that the recommendation placed too much
responsibility on funding agencies. He suggested the recommendation
encourage the emergency medicine academic organization to help its
members find other funding opportunities. He thought there were
many opportunities through other organizations that should be
tapped.
Gentilello said he has long supported placing a priority on
research in this area. However, funding agencies cannot be forced
to accept this. He agreed with Brown that professional societies
should be clear about funding opportunities. At the same time, the
data indicate many missed opportunities for treatment in the ED.
For some patients, the ED visit is the only contact with the
medical care system. It can be their only opportunity for
intervention, and injuries are the most common events that bring
people into contact with the emergency department. We can present a
strong case that work in the ED should be a high priority.
Pollock suggested that ED visits are crucial opportunities, and
the supporting text for this recommendation can make that clear. It
is possible to emphasize this topic without stating that it should
take precedence over other issues or have a certain amount of
resources devoted to it.
Hungerford thought that work in the ED needed a higher priority
and more resources if the field is to move forward.
Pollock asked for a more specific definition of
"prioritization." It is unfortunate, but in the eyes of funders, it
is perceived as a zero sum game.
Bernstein suggested that the supporting text for this
recommendation would have to explain the need for political
commitment to changing the health and social outcomes resulting
from alcohol problems.
Hargarten suggested that we do not have to ask federal agencies
to make research on alcohol problems in the ED a high priority.
Instead, we could recommend that, compared with other settings, the
prevalence of alcohol problems among ED patients makes it worthy of
careful consideration. We can also recommend that research efforts
should include an ED focus and that emergency medicine experts
should be included in the grant review process. This strategy would
attempt to broaden the focus of current research activities to
include the ED.
Longabaugh commented that an NIAAA effort to conduct research on
spirituality and addiction came about by setting aside funds
specifically for this topic. He said the way to accomplish this is
to find and work with agency staff interested in the topic. He
believed that data on the prevalence and severity of alcohol
problems in EDs can have a major impact.
Ries agreed and suggested that this recommendation should
promote ED-based research by emphasizing the large number of ED
patients affected by alcohol problems and the significant health
care impact of those problems.
Fiellin suggested the recommendation should ask for a level of
support that is commensurate with the burden of illness.
Gentilello pointed out that the literature includes 40
randomized trials on brief interventions in family and general
practice settings. Three (one in press) are in emergency medicine.
The emergency department at Harborview probably sees 50 times as
many patients with alcohol problems as the psychiatry or family
medicine departments. If we were to choose one place to set up a
screening system to find people who need interventions, it should
be the emergency department. He said there needs to be a shift in
priorities.
Mary Dufour described how NIAAA sets research priorities. To
secure some funding for this conference, she had to "compete" with
other conferences, which indicates that this issue is high on the
NIAAA list of priorities. NIAAA has a National Advisory Council
with a subcommittee that helps to set research priorities.
Interacting with the Council is an important way to influence
research priorities, she said. Every three to five years, NIAAA
reviews its whole research portfolio; it identifies gaps, which
become research priorities. Alcohol and injury, as well as brief
interventions, are on the list. NIAAA is a small institution with
more priorities than money.
Brown suggested that the recommendation remain as is, but that
the supporting text list ways that priorities could be changed.
Because drug use is also an important issue among ED patients, he
thought combining alcohol and drug research in EDs could lead to
more research dollars. He noted a growing understanding of the
importance of screening for alcohol and other drugs together. To
appeal to NIDA, he said, the referral aspect of the research should
be strong because of their focus on treatment.
Diesenhaus agreed that both support from staff in an agency and
the "burden of illness" argument could be influential. He said that
demand for research in EDs from outside an agency would also be
important. He suggested that conference participants needed to
interact with individuals and groups that influence policy.
Gentilello acknowledged that there is a demand problem. The goal
is to help trauma surgeons and emergency physicians realize that
dealing with alcohol problems is an integral part of their job.
Research on alcohol problems is as important as research on sepsis
and CPR. At the NIH web site, he found no information on
alcohol-related research in the surgery section. It was all in the
alcohol section, which surgeons do not explore. If we want surgeons
to become interested, it should be repeated in the surgery
section.
Longabaugh remarked that NIH is increasingly trying to
individualize the routing of grant applications so that study
section members are a matter of public record. If a study section
does not include a relevant expert, then a cover letter with the
grant application can request such an expert.
Li suggested that adding a reference to the Healthy People 2010
objective to reduce alcohol-related injury and ED visits by 15%
might enhance the rationale for more research.
General comments about the recommendations
After participants had given extensive feedback on specific
proposed recommendations, Hungerford asked if they had general
comments about the recommendations overall.
Fiellin reflected on increasing information about the biological
basis for addictive disorders, the increasing effectiveness of
pharmacotherapy, and the fact that we are trying look at these
disorders the same way we look at chronic medical conditions like
hypertension and diabetes. He asked whether we might initiate
pharmocotherapy for patients with alcohol-related problems in the
ED, much like we initiate use of oral hypoglycemics and
anti-hypertensives with some type of follow-up.






Session 2.
Identifying ED Patients with Alcohol Problems

Robert Woolard, MD
Many patients in the emergency department (ED) have alcohol
problems, and they can be identified.1 Research on techniques used
to identify these patients has been conducted, but several areas of
interest should be addressed by further research. We need to
further examine and refine alcohol-screening questionnaires in the
ED. We need to determine the sequence and combination of questions
and tests that constitute the best screening process. We need to
study barriers to screening, identify factors that promote
screening implementation, and demonstrate the impact of a screening
program in the ED. The final aim of screening must be improved
outcomes through referral and counseling. Identification is only
the first step in a process of care.
Alcohol problems defined
Alcohol problems designate a spectrum from risk behavior to
illness, and from problematic consumption to alcohol use disorder.
We must be careful when interpreting the results of studies, and in
our own design of screening procedures, that we are clear about the
endpoints we are measuring. Clinicians in the ED are interested in
screening for several alcohol endpoints. Acute intoxication is of
concern to emergency physicians. Intoxication in a driver would
certainly be considered an "alcohol problem." The blood or breath
alcohol concentration (BAC), coupled with our clinical
observations, may help us identify intoxication. Most alcohol
screening tests identify patients with alcohol use disorders or
problematic consumption of alcohol. The American Psychiatric
Association in DSM III-R, IV2 and the World Health Organization
(WHO) in the 9th and 10th International Classification of Diseases
(ICD-9, -10) have rigorously defined alcohol abuse and alcohol
dependence.3 These definitions largely agree for dependence, but
not for abuse. DSM includes social and legal consequences of abuse
and ICD-10 has only medical and psychological consequences. Fewer
cases of alcohol abuse meet the ICD-10 definition. In general, an
alcohol use disorder is present when an aspect of the patient's
function has been compromised
by alcohol. Before function is compromised, problematic
consumption occurs. Much of the emphasis of screening has shifted
toward identifying patients with high alcohol consumption before
disease develops. WHO defines hazardous drinking as 4 or more
drinks/day for men and 2 or more drinks/day for women. The National
Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) defines at-risk
drinking as consumption of more than 14 drinks/week or more than 4
drinks/occasion for men ages 18 to 65. For women of all ages and
men older than age 65, more than 7 drinks/week or more than 3
drinks/occasion is considered at risk. Binge drinking alone is also
of concern and has been variably defined as more than 3, 4, 5, or 6
drinks on an occasion.4
Characteristics of an ideal ED screening test or sequence of
tests
An ideal screening test would be accurate, practical, and
motivational. The accuracy of a test can be measured in several
ways. For a screening test, high sensitivity is the most desirable
parameter. High sensitivity ensures that most of the patients with
problems will be detected. High specificity is also desirable to
help ensure that positive tests represent real problems. There is a
trade off between sensitivity and specificity defined by the
receiver operator curve. The area under the operator curve best
reflects the performance of a test; the larger the area the better
the test. Each point on the curve represents a potential "cut
point." A cut point with a high sensitivity and specificity should
be manifest in an ideal test.
Theoretically, an ideal test should remain accurate throughout
the alcohol use spectrum. However, real tests don't perform
uniformly across a spectrum. For example, if we're interested in
identifying patients with binge drinking, we can define binge
drinking as 3, 4, 5, or 6 drinks on an occasion. Screening tests
designed for patients with more severe problems (6 drinks) will be
less sensitive at identifying patients with less severe problems (3
drinks).
An ideal test would perform uniformly in all populations and
sub-groups. However, when we screen populations with high case
rates (trauma admissions, 63%),5 a highly sensitive test with
moderate specificity performs well. The same test used to screen a
population with low case rates (pregnant clinic patients, 7%)6 does
not perform as well. In this population, a test with higher
specificity may be needed to avoid
too many false positives. A test that is used to screen a
diverse population (such as ED patients) will perform better in
some subgroups than others based of the different case rates among
subgroups.
An ideal test should remain accurate in the presence of common
ED problems, such as stress, injury, acute illness, intoxication,
other drug use, depression, and anxiety disorders. Many of the
screening tests were developed outside the ED. Fortunately, many
have been applied to ED populations. Hence, their performance has
been demonstrated in the presence of some of these distracting
factors. An ideal test should also remain accurate with differences
in gender, age, race, ethnicity, or language. Some variation in
test performance among demographic groups has been demonstrated in
studies of screening tests in the ED.7,8 An ideal test in the ED
would address both current and lifetime alcohol problems. Current
use would more likely prompt referral or counseling, but past use
predicts poor outcome from medical problems such as injury.9
In research trials, the impracticality of a screening test may
not be evident. Research staff do not have to contend with adding a
screening test to an already lengthy list of clinical care duties.
In clinical practice, several practical issues will make all the
difference to successful implementation. The ease of use of a
screening test will determine its success. Staff with any level of
prior health training and little additional training should be able
to administer an ideal test. Results should be immediately
available and easy to interpret. The test should be acceptable to
regulators, payers, ED staff, and ED patients.
Several factors may interfere with implementation. For example,
patients may find certain questions offensive, or they may not be
willing to have blood drawn or submit to breathalyzers. Clinical
staff may be uncomfortable asking some types of questions.
Regulators may restrict access to records based on answers to
certain questions and add burdens to hospital record-keepers.
Payers may pay for some tests and not others. These and other
factors may reduce the effectiveness of a screening procedure that
has been proven effective in research trials.
Most experts agree that an ideal ED test is brief (1 to 2
minutes). Most of the quest to develop efficient ED screening has
emphasized brevity. However, a longer test could be
self-administered. An ideal screening test should not interfere
with the routine sequence of medical history, physical examination,
and laboratory testing. The test should be
confidential since there may be legal, financial, or social
consequences to screening positive. Finally, the ideal test should
actually motivate the patient to further assessment, counseling, or
referral as needed.
Currently available screening tests
Based on current evidence, screening should be undertaken using
one or a combination of structured questionnaires.10 Screening
undertaken using clinical impression or biochemical tests is not as
accurate or as sensitive as structured questionnaires for
identifying alcohol use disorders or problematic consumption.7 Of
course, BAC can help identify acute intoxication. The alcohol
concentration can be determined by saliva testing, breath analysis,
or blood test.11,12
Clinical impression
Clinicians often use their general impression to help with
diagnosis, but clinical impressions concerning alcohol problems can
be inaccurate. Trained practitioners counseling alcoholics could
identify only 50% of acutely intoxicated patients.13 Primary care
physicians and emergency physicians identified fewer than 50% of
patients with alcohol problems. Unfortunately, the majority of
physicians (54%) screen only those patients they suspect based on
their clinical impressions.14-16 Stereotypic profiling may be the
consequence of screening only suspected patients. Gentilello
reported that in a trauma center ED, staff suspected alcohol-ism in
26% of patients who screened negative on structured questionnaires.
These patients were more likely to be young, male, disheveled,
uninsured, and low income.17 Of course, some ED patients may
spontaneously volunteer information about drinking. Cherpitel
reported that patient self-report of drinking prior to arrival had
a sensitivity of 29% for alcohol problems in the ED.7
Structured questionnaires
Self-report may be enhanced when specific alcohol questions are
asked. Cyr reported that a single question in a primary care
setting-"Have you ever had a drinking problem?"-had a high
sensitivity (40% to 70%).18 Subsequent reports from other
institutions did not replicate the high sensitivity of this single
question.19-23 Cherpitel evaluated single question screens in the
ED and found them to be less sensitive than structured
questionnaires.7
Most existing screens were developed for primary care settings
to detect alcohol use disorders. The CAGE was developed in 1968 as
a brief screening tool for primary care providers to detect alcohol
abuse and dependence. CAGE is a mnemonic from four questions, Cut
down, Annoyed, Guilty, and Eye opener. The questions address
problems over the patient's lifetime. CAGE takes 1 to 2 minutes to
administer.24,25
The MAST (Michigan Alcohol-Screening Test), developed in 1971 as
a screen for alcohol abuse and dependence, has 24 yes/no questions.
MAST has been self-administered and used in a computer format. It
addresses problems over the patient's lifetime. MAST requires 20
minutes to administer. A shortened version of the MAST exists, a
10-question Brief (B) MAST. BMAST takes 5 to 12 minutes to
administer and performs nearly as well as the longer
version.26-28
SAAST (Self-Administered Alcoholism Screening Test) was
developed in 1972 to screen for alcohol abuse and dependence. It
has 35 yes/no questions. While lengthy, the SAAST has the advantage
of being self-administered, and it has also been administered in a
computerized format. It addresses problems over the patient's
lifetime. A shortened, 9-item version, the Brief SAAST, takes the
patient 5 to 10 minutes to complete.29,30
More recently, screens have been developed to detect at-risk
drinkers. WHO developed the AUDIT (Alcohol Use Disorder
Identification Test) in 1992 as a brief screening tool to detect
at-risk drinking in addition to alcohol abuse and dependence. AUDIT
has 10 questions. It assesses problems experienced within the last
three months and over the patient's lifetime. AUDIT takes 4 to 8
minutes to administer.31,32
Several screens have been developed for pregnant women. Concern
about even lower levels of alcohol consumption in this group has
prompted development of the screens TWEAK, T-ACE, and NET. TWEAK
screens for alcohol abuse and dependence. It has five questions,
addresses problems over the patient's lifetime, and takes 3 to 5
minutes to administer.33 T-ACE also screens for alcohol abuse and
dependence. T-ACE has three of the four CAGE questions and replaces
the guilt question with tolerance question. T-ACE addresses
problems over the patient's lifetime and takes 1 to 2 minutes to
administer.34 NET was developed to screen pregnant patients for
at-risk drinking, alcohol abuse, and dependence. It is a
three-question screen that takes about 1 minute.33
One screen has been developed for emergency department use, the
Rapid Alcohol Assessment Screen (RAPS4). Cherpitel screened an ED
population with questions from CAGE, BMAST, AUDIT, and TWEAK. She
created RAPS4 by combining the four highest-yield questions from
those screens, which covered feeling guilty after drinking,
blackouts, failing to do what is normally expected after drinking,
and morning drinking. However, this new instrument has not been
studied when administered as a stand-alone test.35
In addition to these questionnaires, NIAAA suggests that all
primary care physicians ask an opening question-"Do you drink
alcohol?"- followed by three questions about alcohol consumption
and then the CAGE. This sequence was not explicitly designed or
studied as a "screening test." D'Onofrio and others have
recommended using the NIAAA approach in the ED.10
Studies of screening tests
Cherpitel conducted two studies comparing multiple screening
tests in the ED. In the first study, TWEAK and AUDIT were most
sensitive, identifying 84% and 81% of patients, respectively, with
an ICD-10 diagnosis of alcohol dependence.7 In the second study,
RAPS and AUDIT were more sensitive than TWEAK and CAGE, identifying
79% and 78% compared with 72% and 71%, respectively, of patients
with an ICD-10 or DSM-IV diagnosis of alcohol dependence, harmful
drinking, or abuse.5,36
Soderstrom has compared multiple screening tests in a trauma
center. He reported that CAGE performed best, with a sensitivity of
84%, for a DSM-IV diagnosis of alcohol dependence.37 Fiellin
reviewed 38 studies of screening for alcohol use disorder in the
primary care setting. For at-risk, hazardous, or harmful drinking,
AUDIT was found most effective with sensitivities of 51% to 97%.
For alcohol abuse or dependence, CAGE was found most effective with
sensitivities of 43% to 94%. As expected, CAGE and AUDIT performed
best within the spectrum of alcohol use they were developed to
explore.38
Screening biases
Cherpitel analyzed variability of test performance in subgroups
of ED patients.39 In her first ED study, CAGE, BMAST, AUDIT, and
TWEAK were less sensitive among females, whites, and non-injured
patients. In
her second ED study with Hispanic patients, CAGE, BMAST, AUDIT,
TWEAK, and RAPS were less sensitive in females, patients with less
acculturation, and non-dependent drinkers.36 Lowering the cut point
on these screening instruments improved sensitivity without loss of
specificity among females. Using lower cut points for females may
maximize screening test performance.40
Bradley reviewed nine studies with data on women's responses to
screening mainly in primary care settings. CAGE, AUDIT, and TWEAK
were the best tests for alcohol dependence among women. Their
reported sensitivities were 66% to 92%. All three screens performed
better among black women than among white women. TWEAK per-formed
better than CAGE or AUDIT among white women. CAGE and AUDIT had low
sensitivities (59% and 48% respectively) for alcohol dependence
among white women. We must be careful not to employ screening
techniques that do not address important subgroups.41
Evidence of such low sensitivity in an important subgroup may
necessitate use of multiple screens tailored to subgroups. In
addition to women, other subgroups such as adolescents, older
adults, pregnant women, psychiatric patients, and Spanish speakers
may need screening with modified or unique tests. Standard screens
may not perform as well in these patient subgroups that may
represent a considerable part of the ED population. Adjustment of
cut points or use of alternative screening tests may be necessary
for these subgroups.
Alcohol concentration
Many injured ED patients are screened with a BAC, which can help
identify intoxication. The presence of alcohol may not always
indicate an alcohol problem. While a very high BAC in an unimpaired
patient can be a specific screen for dependence,42 BAC is an
insensitive screen for an alcohol use disorder. One study found
that only one-third of intoxicated drivers had an alcohol use
disorder.43 In an ED study, BAC was a poor screen for alcohol abuse
or dependence with a sensitivity of 20%, less sensitive than
self-reported drinking.7 In another ED study, a saliva alcohol
level equivalent to a BAC greater than 0.10 g/dl in an injured
patient identified harmful drinkers (AUDIT > 
8) with a sensitivity of 65%.44 In one trauma
center, BAC had a sensitivity of 63% for an alcohol disorder.5
Other biochemical markers such as mean corpuscular volume, platelet
count, liver enzymes, gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT),
aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase
(ALT), and carbohydrate deficient transferrin (CDT) perform poorly
with sensitivities of 13% to 67% for alcohol use disorders or
problematic con-sumption.45-50 Biochemical tests other than BAC may
have use in settings other than an ED, but they offer little as
screening tests for ED patients.
Research questions: improving existing screening
questionnaires
We still need to find the most accurate test for ED use. This
may be RAPS4, which is designed for the ED, but it needs further
direct testing. Many tests would be improved by wording questions
to address current problems (the past year or three months) rather
than lifetime problems. Screening with embedded questions and
indirect questions may also improve self-report among adolescents
and other groups.20,51-53 These approaches need further testing in
the ED.
The most practical test may be the shortest, the three-question
NET. Further sequencing of questions within questionnaires may also
improve efficiency.35 If one question answered "yes" yields a
positive test score, asking that one first and stopping as soon as
the score is positive would be the most efficient approach.
Cherpitel has analyzed the sensitivity of each of the RAPS4
questions and sequenced them from most to least sensitive for most
efficient use.35
Minimizing question sets for interviews will result in obtaining
less information. Computer-administered or self-administered
screens may address this issue by allowing patients to spend more
time completing in-depth questioning with no additional staff
time.54,55 This approach promises practical avenues for obtaining
more information. A trial of screening tests in various formats
(e.g., interview, self-administered forms, and computer
interaction) should be undertaken to compare their cost and value
in the ED.
The most motivational screening test is unknown. Drawing blood
and confronting patients with their blood alcohol levels may
actually push them away from counseling. Screening questions that
reveal the negative consequences or link alcohol to current
problems may motivate patients to seek counseling. Providing
immediate feedback may help make the transition from screening to
counseling with little additional intervention. The motivational
aspects of a variety of screens, with and without verbal or
computer feedback, need to be explored.
Research questions: finding the best approach to screening
To determine the best of the available screens, a multi-center
trial with a broad demographic mix and a large number of patients
subjected to different screens is needed. Further evaluation should
be performed of lower cut points for TWEAK, CAGE, and AUDIT. The
advantage of tailored screens or specific questions for subgroups
such as women,41 adolescents,54-59 and elders,60-64 needs to be
determined. RAPS4 must be further tested as a stand-alone screen in
isolation and against other tests. A longer, self-administered
screen-including one administered by computer-should also be tested
in the ED.
To determine the best sequence for screening, the approach
recommended by NIAAA for primary care should be compared with other
sequences. Several trials of variations of the NIAAA approach are
warranted. Trials should be conducted starting with other or no
opening questions, using other consumption questions such as those
in AUDIT, using other screens such as TWEAK rather than CAGE,
changing the sequence to CAGE or TWEAK followed by consumption
questions, and checking BAC at the beginning or end of the
protocol.
The best screen should be determined in the context of a
screening and intervention program. Some questions or screens may
lead naturally to referral and treatment. Others may not promote
referral and treatment. Much of the screening literature is
isolated from intervention. Future studies need to incorporate
evaluation of screening linked to intervention protocols.
Barriers to implementing screening
In a research protocol in England, nurses were trained to screen
all emergency patients with CAGE and then provide feedback. Only
20% of patients were screened. Of them, 19% had positive CAGE
scores; of those, only 41% were provided feedback. Even with
feedback, only 12% accepted follow-up. Of 4,663 patients, only 13
were entered into the trial and the trial was abandoned.65,66
There are multiple barriers to screening. Nurses identified lack
of resources, inadequate training, stress, poor morale, and no
perceived value to the intervention. In a survey sponsored by the
West Virginia Chapter of the American College of Emergency
Physicians, a minority of emergency physicians reported routine
screening and counseling of ED patients.67 The authors reported
provider attitudes of disinterest,
avoidance, disdain, and pessimism as well as inadequate time,
insufficient education, and lack of resources as barriers. Surveys
and interventions should be undertaken to define and reduce
barriers to implementing screening in clinical practice.
Currently, screening is a research tool, not a clinical tool. ED
staff does not use structured questionnaires for alcohol screening.
ED staff has no systematic approach to alcohol screening. Staff
chooses to screen some individuals and not others based on clinical
suspicions or partially implemented protocols. In general, ED staff
screens less often than addiction experts recommend.
Universal screening is appropriate in populations with high case
rates. EDs have reported high case rates of alcohol problems,
especially acute intoxication, from 9% to 31%.17,28,46,68-71 Within
the ED, there are even higher case rates in subgroups. Major
trauma, injuries, assaults,72 depression, and alcohol-related
medical problems like gastrointestinal bleeding or seizures define
even higher risk subgroups. Many experts advocate focusing
screening on some of the highest-risk groups or screening with
greater intensity and different tools in these groups.
Implementing screening in clinical practice
Any ED staff member could be assigned the screening task.
Physician, nurse, clerical, social work, or volunteer staff can
conduct screening. We do not know which staff group will be most
effective. Self-administered questionnaires, computer screen
interactions, or interview techniques may be easier to implement.
Screening questions can be stand-alone or embedded into general
health questionnaires or existing registration, physician, and
nurse documentation. Screening protocols can be mandatory or
voluntary. The approaches that will be most effective in ED
practice should be determined by studying the implementation of
these strategies in actual ED clinical practices. Studies of the
translation of efficacious research practice into clinical practice
is needed most since screening instruments have been used by
research staff and not clinical staff.
Impact of screening
ED patient care should be improved by implementing alcohol
screening programs. A major limit to realizing this improvement is
the lack of counseling available to address patients' alcohol
problems in most EDs.
Most EDs provide very limited alcohol services. When care is
unavailable, screening makes little sense to clinicians. Realizing
a gain from screening in an ED is entirely dependent upon linking
the screening program to some form of counseling, onsite or through
referral services. The impact of screening should be demonstrated
in ED environments that have treatment available, an adequate
volume of alcohol-involved patients, and the capacity to undertake
clinical trials. Studies in these centers should demonstrate the
benefits of screening: increased referrals, more patients receiving
counseling, and better outcomes such as reduction of risk
behaviors.
Summary: research areas of interest concerning screening
The ideal screen that is accurate, practical, and motivational
has not been developed. Researchers must continue to analyze the
performance of structured questionnaires and try computer-based
screening tools in the ED. The sequence of screening tests needs to
be evaluated by studying the NIAAA approach and several
alternatives. Screening must move from research to clinical
practice. Barriers to screening in clinical practice must be
identified and removed. Studies of implementation of screening
programs in ED clinical practice should be undertaken. The impact
of screening on referral and intervention, as well as outcomes such
as reduced risk behaviors, must be demonstrated.
References
1. Lowenstein S, Koziol-McLain J, Thompson M, et al. Behavioral
risk factors in emergency department patients: a multisite survey.
Acad Emerg Med 1998; 5:781-7.
2. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders. Washington (DC): American Psychiatric
Press; 1994.
3. Spitzer R, Williams J, Gibbon M, et al. User's Guide for the
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-III-R. Washington (DC):
American Psychiatric Press; 1990.
4. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. The
Physician's Guide to Helping Patients with Alcohol Problems.
Washington (DC): U.S. Department of Health and Human Services;
1995. NIH Publication No. 95-3769.
5. Soderstrom C, Smith GS, Kufera JA, et al. The accuracy of
the CAGE, the Brief Michigan Alcoholism Screening Test, and the
Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test in screening trauma
center patients for alcoholism. J Trauma 1997;43:962-9.
6. Gale T, Ja W, Welty T. Differences in detection of alcohol
use in a prenatal population (on a Northern Plains Indian
Reservation) using various methods of ascertainment. South Dakota
Journal of Medicine 1998;51:235-40.
7. Cherpitel C. Screening for alcohol problems in the emergency
department. Ann Emerg Med 1995;26:158-66.
8. Cherpitel C. Comparison of screening instruments for alcohol
problems between black and white emergency room patients from two
regions of the country. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 1997;21:1391-7.
9. Jurkovich G, Rivara F, Gurney J, et al. The effects of acute
alcohol intoxication and chronic alcohol abuse on outcome from
trauma. JAMA 1993;270:51-6.
10. D'Onofrio G, Bernstein E, Bernstein J, et al. Patients with
alcohol problems in the emergency department, part 1: improving
detection. Acad Emerg Med 1998; 5:1200-9.
11. Gibb K, Yee A, Martin S, et al. Accuracy and usefulness of
the breath alcohol analyzer. Ann Emerg Med 1984;13:516-20.
12. Gibb K. Serum alcohol levels, toxicology screens, and use
of the breath alcohol analyzer. Ann Emerg Med 1986;15:349-53.
13. Sobel M, Sobel L, VanderSpeck R. Relationships among
clinical judgement, self-report and breath analysis measures of
intoxication in alcoholics. J Consult Clin Psychol
1979;47:205-6.
14. Becker B, Woolard RH, Nirenberg TD, Minugh A, Longabaugh R,
Clifford P. Alcohol use among subcritically injured emergency
department patients. Acad Emerg Med 1995;2:784-90.
15. Rydon P, Redman S, Sanson-Fisher R, Reid A. Detection of
alcohol-related problems in general practice. J Stud Alcohol
1992;53:197-202.
16. Isaacson J, Butler R, Zacharek M, Tzelepis A. A screening
with the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT) in an
inner-city population. J Gen Intern Med 1994;9:550-3.
17. Gentilello L, Villaveces A, Ries RR, et al. Detection of
acute alcohol intoxication and chronic alcohol dependence by trauma
center staff. J Trauma 1999; 47:1131-9.
18. Cyr M, Wartman S. The effectiveness of routine screening
questions in the detection of alcoholism. JAMA 1988;259:51-4.
19. Fleming M, Barry K. The effectiveness of alcoholism
screening in an ambulatory care setting. J Stud Alcohol
1991;52:33-6.
20. Fleming M, Barry K. A three-sample test of a masked alcohol
screening questionnaire. Alcohol 1991;26:81-91.
21. Moran M, Naughton B, Hughes S. Screening elderly veterans
for alcoholism. J Gen Intern Med 1990;5:361-4.
22. Schorling J, Willems J, Klas P. Identifying problem
drinkers: lack of sensitivity of the two-question drinking test. Am
J Med 1995;98:232-6.
23. Taj N, Devera-Sales A, Vinson DC. Screening for problem
drinking: does a single question work? J Fam Pract
1998;46:328-35.
24. Ewing J. Detecting alcoholism: the CAGE questionnaire.
JAMA. 1984;252: 1905-7.
25. Mayfield D, McLeod G, Hall P. The CAGE questionnaire:
validation of a new alcohol screening instrument. Am J Psychiatry
1974;131:1121-3.
26. Pokorny A, Miller B, Kaplan H. The Brief MAST: a shortened
version of the Michigan Alcoholism Screening Test. Am J Psychiatry
1972;129:342-8.
27. Selzer M. The Michigan Alcoholism Screening Test: the quest
for a new diagnostic instrument. Am J Psychiatry
1971;127:1653-8.
28. Selzer M, Vinokur A, van Rooijen M. A self-administered
Short Michigan Alcoholism Screening Test (SMAST). J Stud Alcohol
1975;36:117-26.
29. Davis L, Jr., Hurt R, Morse R, O'Brien P. Discriminant
analysis of the Self-Administered Alcoholism Screening Test.
Alcohol Clin Exp Res 1987;11:269-73.
30. Davis L, Jr., Morse R. Self-Administered Alcoholism
Screening Test: a comparison of conventional versus
computer-administered formats. Alcohol Clin Exp Res
1991;15:155-7.
31. Saunders J, Aasland O, Amundsen A, Grant M. Alcohol
consumption and related problems among primary health care
patients: WHO Collaborative Project on Early Detection of Persons
With Harmful Alcohol Consumption, I. Addiction 1993;88:349-62.
32. Saunders J, Aasland O, Babor T, De La Fuente J, Grant M.
Development of the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test
(AUDIT). Addiction 1993;88:791-804.
33. Russell M, Martier S, Sokol R, et al. Screening for
pregnancy risk-drinking. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 1994;18:1156-61.
34. Sokol R, Martier S, Ager J. The T-ACE questions: practical
prenatal detection of risk-drinking. Am J Obstet Gynecol
1989;160:863-70.
35. Cherpitel C. A brief screening instrument for problem
drinking in the emergency room: the RAPS4. Rapid Alcohol Problems
Screen. J Stud Alcohol 2000;61:447-9.
36. Cherpitel C. Differences in performance of screening
instruments for problem drinking among blacks, whites and Hispanics
in an emergency room population. J Stud Alcohol 1998;59:420-6.
37. Soderstrom CA, Smith GH, Kufera JA, et al. The accuracy of
the CAGE, the Brief Michigan Alcohol Screening Test, and the
Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test in screening trauma
center patients for alcoholism. J Trauma 1997; 43:962-9.
38. Fiellin DA, Reid MC, O'Connor PG. Screening for alcohol
problems in primary care: a systematic review. Arch Intern Med
2000;160:1977-89.
39. Cherpitel C, Clark W. Ethnic differences in performance of
screening instruments for identifying harmful drinking and alcohol
dependence in the emergency room. Alcohol Clin Exp Res
1995;19:628-34.
40. Cherpitel C. Analysis of cut points for screening
instruments for alcohol problems in the emergency room. J Stud
Alcohol 1995;56:695-700.
41. Bradley KA, Boyd-Wickizer J, Powell SH, Burman ML. Alcohol
screening questionnaires in women. JAMA 1998;280:166-71.
42. National Criteria Committee, National Council on
Alcoholism. Criteria for the diagnosis of alcoholism. Am J
Psychiatry 1972;129:127-35.
43. Gijbers A, Raymond A, Whelan G, et al. Does a blood alcohol
level of 0.15 or more identify accurately problem drinkers in a
drunk-driver population? Med J Aust 1991;154:448-52.
44. Clifford P, Sparadeo F, Minugh P, et al. Identification of
hazardous/harmful drinking among subcritically injured patients.
Acad Emerg Med 1996;3:239-45.
45. Cleary P, Miller M, Bush B, Warburg M, Delbanco T, Aronson
M. Prevalence and recognition of alcohol abuse in a primary care
population. Am J Med 1988; 85:466-71.
46. Escobar F, Espi F, Canteras M. Diagnostic tests for
alcoholism in primary health care: compared efficacy of different
instruments. Drug Alcohol Depend 1995;40:151-8.
47. Reynaud M, Schellenberg F, Loisequx-Meunier M-N, et al.
Objective diagnosis of alcohol abuse: compared values of
carbohydrate-deficient transferrin (CDT), gamma-glutamyl
transferase (GGT), and mean corpuscular volume (MCV). Alcohol Clin
Exp Res 2000;24:1414-9.
48. Aithal G, Thornes H, Dwarakanath A, Tanner A. Measurement
of carbohydrate-deficient transferrin (CDT) in a general medical
clinic: is this test useful in assessing alcohol consumption?
Alcohol. 1998;33:304-9.
49. Sillanaukee P, Aalto M, Seppa K. Carbohydrate-deficient
transferrin and conventional alcohol markers as indicators for
brief intervention among heavy drinkers in primary health care.
Alcohol Clin Exp Res 1998;22:892-6.
50. Yersin B, Nicolet J-F, Decrey H, Burner M, Melle G, Pecoud
A. Screening for excessive alcohol drinking: comparative value of
carbohydrate-deficient transferrin, gamma-glutamyltransferase, and
mean corpuscular volume. Arch Intern Med 1995;155:1907-11.
51. Broadhead W, Leon A, Weissman M, et al. Development and
validation of the SDDS-PC screen for multiple mental disorders in
primary care. Arch Fam Med 1995;4:211-9.
52. Leon A, Olfson M, Weissman M, et al. Brief screens for
mental disorders in primary care. J Gen Intern Med.
1996;11:426-30.
53. Hore B, Alsafar J, Wilkins R. An attempt at
criterion-oriented validation of an alcoholism questionnaire in
general practice. Br J Addict 1977;72:19-22.
54. Smith D, Collins M, Kreisberg J, Volpicelli J, Alterman A.
Screening for problem drinking in college freshmen. J Am Coll
Health 1987;36:89-94.
55. Heck E. Developing a screening questionnaire for problem
drinking in college students. J Am Coll Health 1991;39:227-31.
56. Kokotailo P, Adger H, Jr., Duggan A, Repke J, Joffe A.
Cigarette, alcohol, and other drug use by school-age pregnant
adolescents: prevalence, detection, and associated risk factors.
Pediatrics 1992;90:328-34.
57. Werner M, Walker L, Greene J. Screening for problem
drinking among college freshman. J Adolesc Health
1994;15:303-10.
58. Werner M, Walker L, Greene J. Longitudinal evaluation of a
screening measure for problem drinking among female college
freshmen. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 1994;148:1331-7.
59. Werner M, Adger H, Jr. Early identification, screening, and
brief intervention for adolescent alcohol use. Arch Pediatr Adolesc
Med 1995;149:1241-8.
60. Dawson D, Archer L. Relative frequency of heavy drinking
and the risk of alcohol dependence. Addiction 1993;88:1209-18.
61. Willenbring M, Christensen K, Spring W, Jr., Rasmussen R.
Alcoholism screening in the elderly. J Am Geriatr Soc
1987;35:864-9.
62. Bercsi S, Brickner P, Saha D. Alcohol use and abuse in the
frail, homebound elderly: a clinical analysis of 103 persons. Drug
Alcohol Depend 1993;33:139-49.
63. Fulop G, Reinhardt J, Strain J, Paris B, Miller M, Fillit
H. Identification of alcoholism and depression in a geriatric
medicine outpatient clinic. J Am Geriatr Soc 1993;41:737-41.
64. Fink A, Hays RD, Moore AA, Beck JC. Alcohol-related
problems in older persons: determinants, consequences, and
screening. Arch Intern Med 1996; 156:1150-6.
65. Brooker C, Peters J, McCabe C, Short N. The views of nurses
to the conduct of a randomised controlled trial of problem drinkers
in an accident and emergency department. Int J Nurs Stud
1999;36:33-9.
66. Peters J, Brooker C, McCabe C, Short N. Problems
encountered with opportunistic screening for alcohol-related
problems in patients attending an accident and emergency
department. Addiction 1998;93:589-94.
67. Williams J, Chinnis A, Gutman D. Health promotion practices
of emergency physicians. Am J Emerg Med 2000;18:17-21.
68. Burke T. The economic impact of alcohol abuse a







Session 3.
Intervening with Alcohol Problems
in Emergency Settings

Carlo C. DiClemente, PhD* Carl Soderstrom, MD
Excessive alcohol consumption plays an important role in many of
the medical conditions, accidents, and injuries that cause visits
to emergency departments and trauma centers. Many studies have
documented the presence of alcohol among patients admitted to
emergency depart-ment1-5 and trauma center6,7 settings. Other
studies have demonstrated that even blood alcohol concentration
(BAC) determinations under-estimate the extent of alcohol problems
among the patients who are triaged and treated in emergency
settings.4,7 The prevalence of this co-factor to the emergency
admission, and the fact that alcohol is a risk factor both for the
first visit and for a return visit to the emergency setting, have
occasioned a call for an effective method of intervening with
alcohol problems in these settings.8-12 Although there are problems
with and barriers to intervening in these settings, a number of
studies and a few controlled trials indicate that interventions
focused on patients' drinking can reduce the amount of drinking as
well as injury episodes, including repeat re-admission for injury
and other negative consequences of drinking. This review will
examine the rationale for intervening, types of interventions and
interveners, and barriers and concerns that need to be addressed.
Then we will offer suggestions for research and practice related to
intervening effectively with alcohol problems in emergency
settings.
Motivational considerations
The rationale for interventions in the emergency setting is that
the medical condition or injury prompting admission provides a
"window of opportunity" when the individual may be more vulnerable
and more open to seeing the connection between current consequences
and his or her drinking or drug abuse and may be more motivated to
change.13-15
* Presenter
The presence of an adverse consequence that can be linked to
drinking-such as gastrointestinal, vascular, renal, or other
medical problem; an automobile crash; unintentional injury; or
involvement in a violent incident-facilitates intervention among
patients with alcohol problems encountered in the emergency
setting. In an emergency department (ED) study of injured crash
victims who had been drinking, Cherpitel found that more than
one-third linked their drinking to being injured and thus were
deemed good candidates for "brief intervention."16 In another study
by Sommers and colleagues15 involving two trauma centers, patients
who were injured in vehicular crashes and had a positive BAC were
asked, "To what extent do you believe your alcohol consumption was
responsible for this injury?" Overall, 62% attributed being injured
either "somewhat" (24%) or "mostly" or "totally" (38%) to be the
result of drinking. This attribution may be less endorsed with
medical conditions such as liver disease or pancreatitis.
Whether this awareness is viewed as a "hitting bottom"
phenomenon or in more traditional motivational terms, there does
seem to be a connection between readiness to change and recognition
that negative consequences can be directly linked to a behavior.17
Reports from emergency staff and anecdotal descriptions of some
interventions support the results of the above studies, indicating
heightened motivation in the initial period of time in the
emergency setting. However, it is not clear how long this initial
openness to change lasts. There are also reports that after a
couple of days, spurred by concerns about legal responsibility,
family member advice, or rationalizations, patient openness to
discuss drinking and other problem behaviors decreases
dramatically.
We do know that alcohol consumption changes for many problem
drinkers after their visit to an emergency setting. Several studies
have documented consumption changes not only in the intervention
condition but also in the minimal intervention control groups.18,19
However, changes in alcohol consumption are often not sustained
among participants in control conditions. After the emergency
visit, there seems to be a reduction in drinking that gradually
returns to baseline problematic levels for many untreated patients.
Changes in drinking that are produced simply by the visit to the
emergency department seem to dissipate without an alcohol-specific
intervention.18 Although there may be some
natural or unaided salutary effect on drinking resulting from
the medical emergency or injury and the ensuing visit to the
emergency setting,20 that effect appears to be short-lived for many
patients.
Re-injury and readmission to an emergency or other medical
setting is much greater for problem drinkers than for other
emergency patients.12 It is clear from the literature that without
some intervention that can facilitate enduring reductions in
drinking, simply giving medical treatment alone to the problem
drinker admitted to the emergency setting will not reduce the rates
of re-admission or prevent re-injury related to alcohol
consumption. Although it is still not clear what the nature and
extent of the intervention must be, some type of intervention
specifically for drinking needs to be given.
Interventions in the emergency department: a review
Various types of interventions have been proposed and examined
for the emergency medical setting (Figure 1). These range from
brief interventions delivered by the physician to more extensive
counseling during the admission that includes referral to intensive
treatment after discharge. Gentilello and colleagues conducted a
pilot intervention at a Houston emergency department that consisted
of a substance abuse counselor mobilizing the family, and at times
the employer, to intervene with the patient's drinking and to
arrange for immediate entry to a residential substance abuse
treatment program after discharge. This program appeared to be
successful in getting problem-drinking patients to treatment, but
only with families who could be engaged and for patients who had
resources or insurance.21 This and other seminal studies encouraged
many professionals to call for some type of consultation service or
brief intervention to be employed with patients in emergency rooms
or trauma settings.13,22-25
Many of the early studies that documented the efficacy of
interventions with problem drinkers in emergency settings were
evaluations and not controlled studies. Nevertheless, the
documented outcomes have been impressive. Several studies have
examined the outcomes achieved by substance abuse counselors or
alcohol workers intervening with problem drinkers. A brief
intervention in an emergency department by alcohol health workers
demonstrated a mean reduction in drinking of 43% for a subset of
patients who were enrolled in the study.26 The pilot
program in Texas described above demonstrated a 100% successful
referral to alcoholism treatment for patients and families who
agreed to be in the program.21 A substance abuse consultation team
in a trauma center reported acceptance of referral for drug or
alcohol treatment in 62% of the 100 consecutive cases
retrospectively evaluated.27 Hemphill, Bennett, and Watkins
reported successful referral of patients to treatment with nearly
half of the 440 patients referred for treatment remaining for the
duration of the treatment program.28 Early reports of screening and
referral of patients have been promising in terms of reduction in
drinking or in successful connection with appropriate alcohol
treatment programs.29,30 For the most part, these interventions
have used blood alcohol concentration as one of the critical
defining features in screening for the intervention.
Interventions for drinking problems have also been successful in
reducing re-injury. In a recent review of intervention trials for
problem drinking that measured injury outcomes, Dinh-Zarr and
colleagues identified 19 studies that measured injury outcomes
among participants in a variety of settings. They reported that
reductions in a variety of injuries, injury hospitalizations, and
deaths ranged from a 27% reduction in "drinking-related injuries
and accidents" to a 65% reduction in "accidental and violent
deaths."31 However, in this review there was no clear evidence that
the mechanism of action of these interventions was reduced alcohol
consumption. These interventions appeared to affect risk taking in
addition to or instead of reductions in drinking and included
individuals who had legal charges pending. Most of the studies
reviewed were not well controlled and the numbers of participants
and effect sizes reported in these studies were modest.
Until recently, no well-controlled intervention studies have
addressed whether interventions in emergency settings would reduce
alcohol consumption and consequences. Several current publications
have begun to remedy this lack of prospective, randomized trials.
Gentilello and colleagues at the Harborview Medical Center in
Seattle, Washington, conducted a randomized controlled trial in a
Level I trauma center. Patients who screened positive on a
combination of blood alcohol concentration (BAC), serum gamma
glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT), and SMAST scores, and who agreed to
a follow-up study, were randomized into an intervention or control
procedure. The intervention was a single motivational interview
that lasted approximately 30 minutes with
a doctoral-level psychologist trained and certified in
motivational interviewing techniques. A letter was sent summarizing
this session one month later. A total of 366 patients were randomly
assigned to the intervention condition, but nearly 15% of these
patients were discharged before the intervention could be given,
and nearly 2% refused the intervention. At the 12-month follow-up,
the intervention group demonstrated an average reduction in
drinking of 22 drinks per week compared with a reduction of 7
drinks per week for the control group. Most of the drinking
reduction occurred among the patients with mild to moderate alcohol
problems and not in the heaviest drinking subgroup. There were also
significant reductions in new injuries of about 50% at one year and
a reduction in inpatient hospital re-admissions for injury
treatment of 50% at the three-year follow-up. The authors suggest
that this type of intervention alone is insufficient for patients
with more chronic and severe alcohol dependence. Another limitation
of this seminal study is that 50% of participants were lost to
follow-up at 12 months. However, this trial demonstrates that a
rather brief intervention delivered by a trained professional in
the emergency setting can produce significant reductions in
drinking and repeat injury episodes.
A controlled trial of a similar motivational intervention with
older adolescents ages 18 to 19 years treated in an emergency room
following an alcohol-related event randomly assigned 94 of the 184
eligible patients.19 Patients were assigned to a motivational
intervention or a standard control of a handout about drinking and
driving and a list of alcohol treatment agencies. The intervention,
which lasted 30 to 40 minutes, was delivered in the emergency
department either immediately or within a couple of days of the
visit. About 25% of the eligible patients were discharged before
the intervention and another 25% refused to participate.
Nevertheless, drinking and driving, moving violations,
alcohol-related injuries, and alcohol-related problems were
significantly reduced at the six-month follow up, with the
intervention group experiencing one-third to one-half fewer events
than the control group. Although drinking decreased over time for
both intervention and control groups, their drinking levels were
not significantly different. Bachelor's or master's level staff
with one to two years' of experience and extensive motivational
interview training delivered this intervention.
Follow-up was limited to six months, so this study would have
missed any rebound back to baseline at later time points, and the
refusal rate was rather high in this study. However, the evidence
was strong for a harm reduction effect across various indicators of
risk and re-injury.
Who delivers what type of intervention
Most of the interventions described previously were conducted by
specialists trained in alcohol or substance abuse counseling or in
motivational interviewing techniques. These interventionists met
with the patient, discussed drinking and substance use openly and
directly, and offered some advice and assistance. Substance abuse
counselors typically offered advice and referrals to treatment
facilities or self-help programs. Motivational interview counselors
typically discussed the perceived consequences, readiness to
change, pros and cons of change, and plans to reduce drinking and
avoid alcohol-related injuries in the future. Substance abuse
specialists of one type or another typically delivered drinking
interventions in emergency settings with a few exceptions.29,30 No
studies have compared different types of intervention providers in
these settings.
In contrast, physicians or nurses in a variety of primary care
settings have delivered brief alcohol-focused interventions. These
interventions also appear to be effective in reducing drinking and
risky behaviors.20,32,33 One recent study demonstrated that a
brief, patient-centered alcohol counseling intervention delivered
in the context of a regularly scheduled internal medicine visit
produced significant reductions in alcohol consumption among both
male and female high-risk drinkers.34 Based on these interventions
in other medical settings, a number of researchers have recommended
the involvement of the physician in the emergency setting in the
alcohol intervention.9,26,35,36 However, few studies of
physician-delivered interventions in an emergency setting exist.
Clearly, none of the extant studies could be done without the
support and involvement of emergency medicine physicians and trauma
surgeons. However, it may be difficult to get physicians to deliver
these alcohol-focused interventions for a variety of practical,
philosophical, orientation, and training reasons.
To some degree, all interventions described in the emergency
setting are motivational. Each intervention attempts to highlight
problematic alcohol consumption, the connection between injury and
drinking,
and patient plans to address excessive drinking. Prototypic
substance abuse interventions focus on motivation to enter
treatment because the patients are severely dependent, heavy
drinkers. Referral to "appropriate" treatment is the critical end
point of this type of intervention and compliance with the referral
the important outcome. Change of drinking and risky behaviors is
left to the treatment program, and almost always, abstinence from
alcohol is the goal of these treatment programs.37 On the other
hand, motivational interviewing approaches view change as the
province and responsibility of the individual and work with the
individual at whatever level of motivation or stage of change is
appropriate to promote consideration of change and an
individualized plan of action that does not necessarily include
additional treatment or self-help groups like Alcoholics Anonymous.
Brief motivational interventions have been used with a wide range
of problem drinkers and have been found to be effective in reducing
drinking and its consequences.38 Goals for this treatment are
articulated by the client and can include reduction as well as
abstinence from alcohol.
Nearly all interventions delivered in emergency settings consist
of a single intervention visit. It is difficult to prescribe
multiple visits unless the patient is admitted to the hospital from
the emergency department or has an extended stay in a trauma
center. Some researchers have suggested that the follow-up visit to
the clinic for extended treatment would be the best place for
alcohol interventions.25 However, postponing intervention to the
follow-up visit poses great logistical problems. Scheduling of
follow-up visits depends on type of medical problem or injury.
Moreover, these visits are not consistently attended by the patient
or delivered by the same physician who saw the patient in the
initial visit to the emergency setting. Although many single-visit
alcohol interventions in medical settings have been effective,32
the context of the emergency setting does increase the importance
of considering follow through after the initial contact. Gentilello
and colleagues sent a letter home one month after discharge as a
reminder of the intervention conversation.18 A currently funded
trial at the University of Maryland Shock Trauma Center in
Baltimore is using a feedback letter and two or more follow-up
phone calls to extend the intervention beyond the emergency setting
interview. This extension into the post-discharge period is most
relevant for interventions that do not rely completely
on referral to treatment. However, post-discharge follow-up
could also be used to solve problems related to treatment
recommendations and enhance compliance with the
recommendations.
Issues and challenges for interventions in emergency
settings
Substantial evidence indicates that interventions with problem
drinkers in emergency settings can produce significant change in
drinking behavior and/or reduce risk of re-injury. The number of
studies that have demonstrated effects either with volunteer or
randomized participants is modest but increasing, and the effects
range from minimal to very sizeable reduction in risks that have
significant public health importance. Evaluation and referral
interventions have been able to get a number of emergency
department and trauma center patients into alcoholism
treatment.29,30 It is not always clear whether there were long-term
positive outcomes from these trials since referral has been the
outcome variable most often studied. However, one can assume that
some patients referred to treatment had very positive outcomes in
terms of reductions in drinking and of risk profiles. Motivational
interventions in emergency settings have more recently demonstrated
important clinical outcomes in terms of risk-taking, negative
consequences of drinking, and, at times, reductions in
drink-ing.18,19 The number of participants who were not screened,
who refused, who were discharged early, or who were ineligible was
large in some studies. However, when the intervention was delivered
to patients in emergency settings and compared with standard or
minimal interventions, intervention patients had significantly
better outcomes on relevant measures. It is important to note that
minimal interventions are not insignificant since they include, of
necessity, an assessment of drinking behavior and a follow-up
contact, and they are often much more than ordinarily occurs in the
emergency setting. Screening or assessment alone, however, does not
appear to be as effective as some type of specific
intervention.
Bringing research to practice
This review of interventions, focused on addressing alcohol
problems among patients in various medical settings, highlights
several important issues and offers a perspective on the challenges
to creating sustained, effective intervention programs in the
emergency setting. Strategies and
insights from clinical trials should be gathered and made
available to practitioners to help every emergency department and
trauma center implement a coordinated, effective, and feasible
program of screening and intervention for problem drinkers.
However, several conceptual and practical issues need to be
clarified so they can be resolved in a future research and
implementation agenda.
Although an opportunity exists to intervene with patients who
have alcohol use problems, and there are published guidelines for
emergency department and trauma centers concerning intervention,
that opportunity has not been seized.8,9,35,39 Gentilello and
colleagues noted that although "trauma centers are uniquely
positioned to implement pro-grams of alcohol screening,
intervention, and referral," and "despite emphasis on injury
control and prevention, little has been done to incorporate alcohol
intervention programs into care of the injured patient."10 This
observation was based in part on the results of a national survey
of trauma centers which revealed that blood alcohol testing, which
is often a precursor for any intervention, was routinely conducted
at only 64% of centers despite a published guideline by the
Committee on Trauma of the American College of Surgeons indicating
that testing was an "essential" characteristic for those centers.40
The survey also found that although 59% of the centers had
substance abuse counselors, only 5% used screening questionnaires
to identify patients with alcohol use problems.
Although we know of no studies assessing clinical practices
regarding alcohol problems in emergency departments, a survey of
1,055 emergency medicine physicians by Chang and colleagues found
that most physicians favored testing and reporting injured,
alcohol-impaired drivers.41 However, ambivalent attitudes were
revealed concerning alcoholics and alcoholism. On a scale of 0
(strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree) the statement "alcoholics
are difficult to treat" received a mean score of 6.25, and the
statement "alcoholism is a treat-able disease" received a mean
score of 5.27. In an earlier report, Chang and Astrachan documented
low BAC testing rates for intoxicated drivers by emergency
department physicians.42 One of the reasons they cited was
"defeatism about alcoholism management." In a recent survey of
emergency medicine physicians, 78% agreed that alcohol
abuse/dependence is a "treatable disease," but more than 90%
indicated that there was a lack of time to perform interventions,
and only 51% supported
emergency department interventions.43 These attitudes and
practices are similar to those found in a national survey of
physicians practicing internal medicine, family medicine,
obstetrics-gynecology, and psychia-try.44 Most physicians reported
asking about alcohol use but few used recommended screening
protocols or offered formal treatment.
The first challenge for implementing recommended screening and
interventions for problem drinking in emergency settings involves
convincing staff of the importance and efficacy of such
interventions. Although the research to date supports the efficacy
of these interventions, clinical trials are needed to confirm these
findings and to set the stage for the next logical step of
effectiveness studies. Feasibility and successful dissemination
must be demonstrated. Prototype interventions that can reach the
majority of problem drinkers, motivate them to change drinking
patterns or enter appropriate treatment, and produce positive
long-term outcomes should be introduced into several emergency
settings of differing size and staff composition. These multi-site
effectiveness studies can then be used to promote change in
standard practice in all emergency settings.
What we have learned from the research to date gives us some
direction as to how to implement interventions in emergency
settings to reduce drinking and alcohol related risks. The first
step to developing an effective and efficient intervention program
would be to create a screening procedure integrated into the
admission and triage system of the emergency settings. Alcohol
problems can be identified along a range of alcohol use and
consequences. However, it is important to clarify what type of
problem interveners are attempting to address. The screening
procedure can have a net with larger or smaller mesh that can be
set for more or less severe alcohol problems. However, whatever the
titration of the screen, the procedure must be clearly delineated
and uniformly applied to every patient admitted to the emergency
department or trauma center. The primary screen must be integrated
into the standard intake procedure of the emergency setting and
must be the responsibility of the staff to administer to all
patients.
This preliminary screen should trigger a more in-depth
assessment and a brief intervention that can be delivered either
separately or as a package (Figure 2). The assessment is critical
for evaluating motivation
and decisional considerations and for determining the need for
and appropriateness of referrals to treatment. The success of
motivational and patient-centered approaches seems to indicate that
it is critical to take into account the motivation of the patient
and his or her readiness to change.24,25 Once motivated, the
patient may need a variety of options depending on the nature of
the alcohol problem and the needs of the patient. Many treatment
providers believe that intensity of treatment should be determined
by level of alcohol problem, although controlled trials do not
always support the assumption. Greater dependence and,
particularly, greater support for drinking in the environment, may
indicate a need for more intensive treatment, such as
detoxification, inpatient or residential treatment, or intensive
day treatment. Self-help groups like Alcoholics Anonymous, Women
for Sobriety, or Rational Recovery; outpatient treatments; and
guided self-change45 may also be appropriate for a wide range of
drinking problems. In any case, the broader the net cast by the
screening instrument that identifies individuals with alcohol
problems, the more flexible and wide-ranging should be the referral
and post-discharge options.
The assessment and intervention could be delivered by a variety
of trained professionals who have some expertise in motivational
interventions, understand alcohol problems, and are armed with a
series of viable options to assist the patient.35 The intervention,
by necessity, needs to be brief and limited in contact consisting
of 10 to 40 minutes of interaction. Interventions and the staff who
conducts them need to be flexible and creative in adapting to
situations created by the injuries and the noisy and often chaotic
nature of emergency settings. Communication rather than
confrontation, concern rather than condemnation, and facilitation
rather than force or law enforcement should mark the interventions.
If there is a legal aspect to the case, it should be separated from
the clinical intervention as much as possible. Multiple, feasible
referral options that vary in intensity and scope should be
available as part of the intervention. Since data from other
studies indicate that facilitating the referral and making the
connections increase compliance, the intervention ideally should
have a component of compliance enhancement if it includes referral
to community treatment programs.
Next steps
Research is needed to confirm and extend the findings to date
about interventions in emergency settings. Unresolved questions
about the nature and format of the intervention that could use
input from research are enumerated below.
1. Should there be several types of interventions for differing
levels of severity? Individuals with less severe alcohol problems
may benefit from a brief intervention with little or no follow-up
or referral.10 Are there subpopulations that benefit more from
motivational or brief interventions?46,47 Should we triage the most
severe problem patients into a more intensive intervention in the
emergency setting? What are the long-term outcomes (12 months or
more) of various interventions with patients of differing levels of
severity?
2. Who can best deliver the intervention? How involved should
the patient's attending physician in the medical treatment be in
the intervention for alcohol problems? Most emergency department
physicians do not believe that physicians or nurses would be the
best persons to provide effective treatment.42 There are a variety
of professionals that could be trained to deliver the intervention
including physicians, nurses, psychologists, social workers, and
substance abuse counselors. However, it may be more a matter of
skill and ability to work in this setting and deliver the needed
type of intervention rather than of profession that should
determine who should deliver the intervention.
3. Should the intervention include the family? Are family
members a help or hindrance in the intervention? Family members and
partners can be of significant assistance in the intervention.48
However, they can also interfere with the interview by suggesting
non-cooperation, interfering with the candidness of the
self-report, and trying to protect the patient from the
intervention in some misguided attempt to help. Including family
should be done carefully and thoughtfully, if at all.
4. What are the constraints regarding the timing of the
intervention? Must the intervention occur in the first 24 hours or
can it be included in discharge planning and delivered after
discharge? We need to know more about the closing of this "window
of opportunity" and whether delay interferes with motivation.
5. How can emergency staff be trained to facilitate the
screening and intervention? Would particular approaches to training
be more effective in reaching emergency physicians and nurses?
6. How does extent of injury or severity of illness affect the
intervention? It is clear that some injuries create barriers to
intervention in the emergency setting. Is a separate protocol
needed for individuals who are admitted to the hospital for surgery
or other medical treatments that necessitate a hospital stay?
7. Should all interventions triage and intervene based on
patient readiness to change? The perspective of the stages of
change model appears to be an appealing one to help staff and
interventionist under-stand the process of change for addictive and
health behavior.49,50 Incorporating this perspective into
interventions in the emergency setting has been suggested by
several researchers.24,25
8. Are there significant policy issues that must be resolved to
make interventions for alcohol problems more feasible? For example,
many clinicians do not routinely obtain a BAC test because of a
fear of denial of payment for medical care by third-party payors
for injured patients who test positive. This fear is well grounded.
Rivara and colleagues in a survey of insurance commissioners found
that 26 of 31 respondents indicated that intoxication at the time
of injury allowed for exclusion of coverage.51 A review of state
statutes, including those of the District of Columbia, revealed
that 38 states have a provision that allows third-party payors to
issue policies that deny payment for injuries sustained while
intoxicated. While Rivara and associates note, "this option seems
to be enforced rarely by most companies," we are aware of anecdotal
reports of emergency departments and trauma centers that have
ceased testing because of the fears of non-payment. However, our
inquiry to billing department staff at the Maryland Shock Trauma
Center, which admits nearly 6,000 patients annually, revealed not a
single case of denial of payment.
9. There is also a need for health services research to examine
technology transfer and explore ways to disseminate research
findings to emergency settings of differing size and complexity.
Implementation is as important as the intervention in these
settings. Unless screening and
intervention becomes an integral part of the emergency triage
and treatment system, it will be an appendage that will be
inconsistently applied or tried and discarded. An intervention
template with options incorporating the alcohol problem
intervention into the various settings should be developed and
evaluated.
10. As we have indicated, guidelines and best practices have
been published that deal with alcohol dependence and abuse and
emergency medicine. The challenge now is to discover how government
agencies and professional organizations can promote adoption and
implementation of intervention guidelines.
The opportunity
A combination of basic research, program implementation and
evaluation studies, and policy and procedure evaluations are needed
to resolve the issues outlined previously. Twenty years ago, Joseph
Zuska, a surgeon with an interest in alcohol problems among injured
patients noted: "The crisis that brings the alcoholic to the
surgeon is an opportunity for intervention in a progressive, often
fatal disease."52 More recently, the Substance Abuse Task Force
from the Society of Academic Emergency Medicine led by D'Onofrio
and colleagues emphasized that in the emergency department setting,
"Early intervention and appropriate referral of patients with
alcohol problems have the potential to reduce alcohol-related
morbidity and mortality."9 An accumulating body of evidence
supports these calls for intervention. However, systemic and
practical barriers must be overcome and additional research
conducted to take full advantage of this opportunity.
References
1. Cherpitel CJ. Screening for alcohol problems in the
emergency department. Ann Emerg Med 1995;26:158-66.
2. Degutis LC. Screening for alcohol problems in emergency
department patients with minor injury: results and recommendations
for practice and policy. Contemporary Drug Problems
25;1998:463-75.
3. Ewing JA. Detecting alcoholism: the CAGE questionnaire. JAMA
1984; 252:1905-7.
4. Maio RF, Waller PF, Blow FC, Hill EM, Singer KM. Alcohol
abuse/dependence in motor vehicle crash victims presenting to the
emergency department. Acad Emerg Med 1997;4:256-62.
5. Whiteman PJ, Hoffman RS, Goldfrank LR. Alcoholism in the
emergency department: an epidemiologic study. Acad Emerg Med
2000;7:14-20.
6. Rivara FP, Jurkovich GJ, Gurney JG, Seguin D, Fligner CL,
Ries R, Raisys VA, Copass M. The magnitude of acute and chronic
alcohol abuse in trauma patients. Arch Surg 1993;128:907-13.
7. Soderstrom CA, Smith GS, Dischinger PC, McDuff DR, Hebel JR,
Gorelick DA, et al. Psychoactive substance use disorders among
seriously injured trauma center patients. JAMA
1997;277:1769-74.
8. D'Onofrio G, Bernstein E, Bernstein J, Woolard RH, Brewer
PA, Craig SA, Zink BJ. Patients with alcohol problems in the
emergency department, part 1: improving detection. SAEM Substance
Abuse Task Force. Society for Academic Emergency Medicine. Acad
Emerg Med 1998;5(12):1200-9.
9. D'Onofrio G, Bernstein E, Bernstein J, Woolard RH, Brewer
PA, Craig SA, Zink BJ. Patients with alcohol problems in the
emergency department, part 2: intervention and referral. SAEM
Substance Abuse Task Force. Society for Academic Emergency
Medicine. Acad Emerg Med 1998;5(12):1210-7.
10. Gentilello LM, Donovan DM, Dunn CW, Rivara FP. Alcohol
interventions in trauma centers: current practice and future
directions. JAMA 1995;274:1043-8.
11. Lowenstein SR, Weissberg MP, Terry D. Alcohol intoxication,
injuries, and dangerous behaviors-and the revolving emergency
department door. J Trauma 1990;30:1252-8.
12. Soderstrom CA, Cole FJ, Porter JM. Injury in America: the
role of alcohol and other drugs-an EAST position paper prepared by
the Injury Control and Violence Prevention Committee. J Trauma
2001;50(1):1-12.
13. Dyehouse JM, Sommers MS. Brief intervention after
alcohol-related injuries. Substance abuse interventions in general
nursing practice. Nurs Clin North Am 1998;33(1):93-104
14. Longabaugh R, Minugh A, Nirenberg TD, Clifford PR, Becker
B, Woolard R. Injury as a motivator to reduce drinking. Acad Emerg
Med 1995;2:817-25.
15. Sommers MS, Dyehouse JM, Howe SR, Lemmink J, Davis K,
McCarthy M,
Russlee AC. Attribution of injury to alcohol involvement in
young adults
seriously injured in alcohol-related motor vehicle crashes.
Am J Crit Care 2000;
9:28-35

16. Cherpitel CJ. Drinking patterns and problems and drinking
in the event: an
analysis of injury by cause among casualty. Alcohol Clin Exp
Res 1996;2:1130-7.

17. DiClemente CC. Motivation for change: implications for
substance abuse.
Psychological Science 1999;10(3):209-13.

18. Gentilello LM, Rivara FP, Donovan DM, et al. Alcohol
interventions in a
trauma center as a means of reducing the risk of injury
recurrence. Ann Surg
1999;230:473-83.

19. Monti PM, Colby SM, Barnett NP, et al. Brief intervention
for harm
reduction with alcohol-positive older adolescents in a
hospital emergency
department. J Consult Clin Psychol 1999;67(6):989-94.

20. Chick J, Lloyd G, Crombie E. Counseling problem drinkers in
medical wards:
a controlled study. Br Med J 1985;290:965-7.

21. Gentilello LM, Duggan P, Drummond D, et al. Major injury as
a unique
opportunity to initiate treatment in the alcoholic. Am J Surg
1988;156:558-61.

22. El-Guebaly N, Armstrong SJ, Hodgkins DC. Substance abuse
and the
emergency room: programmatic implications. J Addict Dis
1998;17(2):21-40.

23. Madden C, Cole TB. Emergency intervention to break the
cycle of drunken
driving and recurrent injury. Ann Emerg Med 1995;25(2):177-9.

24. Soderstrom CA, Dischinger PC, Kerns TJ, Kufera JA, Mitchell
KA, Scalea TM.
Epidemic increases in concaine and opiate use by trauma
center patients.
J Trauma 2001;51:557-64.

25. Smith AJ, Shepherd JP, Hodgson RJ. Brief interventions for
patients with
alcohol-related trauma. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg
1998;36:408-15.

26. Wright S, Moran L, Meyrick M, O'Connor R, Touquet R.
Intervention by an
alcohol health worker in an accident and emergency
department. Alcohol Alcohol
1998;33(6):651-6.

27. Fuller MG, Diamond DL, Jordan ML, Walters MC. The role of a
substance
abuse consultation team in a trauma center. J Stud Alcohol
1995;56:267-71.

28. Hemphill C, Bennett BE, Watkins, BL. Alcoholism: the
response of a public hospital. Urban Health 1984;13(7):14-6.
29. Bernstein E, Bernstein J, Levenson S. Project ASSERT: an
ED-based intervention to increase access to primary care,
preventive services, and the substance abuse treatment system. Ann
Emerg Med 1997;30(2):181-9.
30. Hungerford DW, Pollock DA, Todd KH. Acceptability of
emergency department-based screening and brief interventions for
alcohol problems. Acad Emerg Med 2000; 7:1383-92.
31. Dinh-Zarr T, Diguiseppi C, Heitman E, Roberts I. Preventing
injuries through interventions for problem drinking: a systematic
review of randomized controlled trials. Alcohol Alcohol
1999;34:609-21.
32. Fleming MF, Barry KL, Manwell LB, Johnson K, London R.
Brief physician advice for problem alcohol drinkers: a randomized
controlled trial in community-based primary care practices. JAMA
1997;277:1039-45.
33. Walsh DC, Hingson RW, Merrigan DM, Levenson SM, Coffman GA,
Heeren T, Cupples LA. The impact of a physician's warning on
recovery after alcoholism treatment. JAMA 1992;267(5):663-7.
34. Ockene JK, Adams A, Hurley TG, Wheeler EV, Hebert JR. Brief
physician and nurse practitioner-delivered counseling for high risk
drinkers. Arch Intern Med 1999;159:2198-2205.
35. Dunn CW, Donovan DM, Gentilello LM. Practical guidelines
for performing alcohol interventions in trauma centers. J Trauma
1997;42:299-304.
36. Reyna TM, Hollis MW, Hulsebus RC. Alcohol-related trauma:
the surgeon's responsibility. Ann Surg 1985;201:194-7
37. Miller WR. Alcoholism: toward a better disease model.
Psychology of Addiction Behaviors 1993;7:129-35.
38. Bien TH, Miller WR, Tonigan JS. Brief interventions for
alcohol problems: a review. Addiction 1993;88:315-36.
39. Center for Substance Abuse Treatment, Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration. Alcohol and Other Drug
Screening of Hospitalized Trauma Patients, Treatment Improvement
Protocol (TIP), No. 16. Rockville (MD): Department of Health and
Human Services; 1995. DHHS Publication No. (SMA) 95-3014.
40. Soderstrom CA, Dailey JT, Kerns TJ. Alcohol and other
drugs: an assessment of testing and clinical practices in U.S.
trauma centers. J Trauma 1994;36:68-73.
41. Chang G, Astrachan BM, Weil U, Bryant K. Reporting
alcohol-impaired drivers: results from a national survey of
emergency physicians. Ann Emerg Med 1992;21:284-90.
42. Chang G, Astrachan BM. The emergency department
surveillance of alcohol intoxication after motor vehicular
accidents. JAMA 1988;260:2533-6.
43. Graham DM, Maio RF, Blow FC, Hill EM. Emergency physician
attitudes concerning intervention for alcohol abuse/dependence in
the emergency department. J Addict Dis 2000;19:45-53.
44. Friedman PD, McCullough D, Chin MH, Saitz R. Screening and
interventions for alcohol problems: a national survey of primary
care physicians and psychiatrists. J Gen Intern Med 2000;
15:84-91.
45. Sobel MB, Sobel LC. Problem Drinkers: Guided Self-change
Treatment. New York (NY): Guilford Press; 1993.
46. Heather N. Interpreting the evidence on brief interventions
for excessive drinkers: the need for caution. Alcohol Alcohol
1995;30(3):287-96.
47. Poikilainen K. Effectiveness of brief interventions to
reduce alcohol intake in primary health care populations: a
meta-analysis. Prev Med 1999; 28(5): 503-9.
48. McCrady BS, Epstein EE. Marital therapy in the treatment of
alcoholism. In: Gurman AS, Jacobson N, editors. Clinical Handbook
of Marital Therapy 1995. 2nd ed. New York (NY): Guilford Press;
1995. p. 369-93.
49. DiClemente CC, Prochaska JO. Toward a comprehensive,
transtheoretical model of change: stages of change and addictive
behaviors. In: Miller WR, Heather N, editors. Treating Addictive
Behaviors. 2nd ed. New York (NY): Plenum; 1998. p.3-24.
50. Zimmerman GL, Olsen CG, Bosworth MF. A "stages of change"
approach to helping patients change behavior. Am Fam Physician
2000;61(5):1409-16.
51. Rivara FP, Tollefson S, Tesh E, Gentilello LM. Screening
trauma patients for alcohol problems: are insurance companies
barriers? J Trauma 2000;48:115-8.
52. Zuska JJ. Wounds without cause. Bull Am Coll Surg
1981;66:5-10.
Figure 1 Types of Emergency Setting Interventions
Brief Advice (and Referral)
Substance Abuse Evaluation and Referral
Motivational Enhancement (and Referral)
Personalized Feedback (New)
Post-Discharge Contact (New)

Figure 2
Points of Intervention


Screening
Evaluation

Referral Counseling







Follow-up



Response to Dr. Carlo DiClemente's Presentation
Gail D'Onofrio, MD
I am honored to be a discussant following Dr. DiClemete's
comments about interventions for patients presenting to the
emergency department (ED) with alcohol problems. We have just heard
compelling evidence regarding the efficacy of brief intervention in
a variety of settings including primary care, inpatient trauma
centers, and emergency departments, and for multiple populations,
ranging from adolescents to adults.
We now know several truths. First, screening and brief
intervention (SBI) does work. A recent evidence-based review of the
literature on SBI, conducted by Dr. Linda Degutis and me, revealed
39 studies (30 randomized controlled and 9 cohort) with a positive
effect demonstrated in 32 of these studies.1 We also know that the
ED visit offers a potential "teachable moment" due to the possible
negative consequences surrounding it and that in essence we, as
emergency physicians, have a captive audience. In addition, we know
that patients presenting to the ED are likely to need our help more
than those who present to primary care. Cherpitel recently compared
patients presenting to an ED with those presenting to primary care
in the same metropolitan area. She found that ED patients were one
and one-half to three times more likely than primary care patients
to report heavy drinking, consequences of drinking, alcohol
dependence, or history of treatment for an alcohol problem.2
It is now time for us to adapt the information we have learned
from these efficacy trials to the ED setting and move on to
effectiveness trials. In doing so, we face unique challenges. These
include time pressures, competing priorities, few formal follow-up
protocols, negative attitudes of the staff, and a multitude of
systems problems in an environment that at best can be described as
controlled chaos. Perhaps the largest hurdle is the fact that ED
practitioners have not yet bought into the idea that SBI is part of
their role or responsibility.
To be effective, our research strategies must be brief and
clear. In real life, there is not a cadre of researchers to screen
and administer lengthy interventions. Therefore, protocols must be
capable of being integrated into existing systems with available
resources.
I am going to show you a clip from a video entitled The
Emergency Physician and the Problem Drinker: Motivating Patients
for Change.3 Actual ED scenarios are used to demonstrate common
problems or traps that arise when physicians attempt to counsel
patients about their alcohol use. The intervention featured, the
brief negotiation interview, includes establishing rapport, raising
the subject of problem drinking, providing feedback, and assessing
the patient's readiness to change. Specific strategies to
intervene, based on the patient's readiness to change, are
demonstrated to help the patient start the process of finding his
or her own solutions to change. Two versions of a physician/patient
interaction are depicted: one that is likely to be unsuccessful,
and one that is likely to be successful.
To be successful in developing effectiveness trials in the ED
setting, researchers must be very clear about a number of issues
when developing their proposals. These issues include:
Who should be screened?
Should we target certain populations-the injured or non-injured;
the at-risk, harmful, or hazardous drinker; or the dependent
drinker? Should we concentrate on the life cycle, from adolescence
to older age, or should we concentrate first on more defined
populations? It is unrealistic to assume that one intervention will
work for everyone.
What should the intervention include?
The message of the intervention is vital. It should be brief,
scripted, and reproducible. Exactly what constitutes brief? The
exact time of the intervention should be recorded. What is included
in the intervention should be clearly stated. Should we be sure to
include the acceptable components of brief intervention as outlined
in the acronym FRAMES: feedback, responsibility, advice, menu of
strategies, empathy, and self-efficacy?4 Is making a connection
between drinking and the ED visit important? Is there a
prescription or recommendation given to the patient? Does the
message include advice or add a component of motivational
enhancement therapy? Does the research protocol monitor adherence
to the message, and how?
Who should provide the screening and intervention?
Which provider actually screens for problems and provides the
intervention? Different sites can be creative about who conducts
the interventions. Is it best done by nurses, physicians, or health
promotion advocates?5 Is it possible that patients can be screened
by completing computer programs while waiting in the ED, with
results then relayed to the physician?6
How can we motivate practitioners to change?
What can be done to motivate physicians and other health care
providers to change their behaviors and incorporate SBI into their
practices? What are the motivators? Are they patient driven so that
documentation of a decrease in recidivism and morbidity and
mortality must be proven to convince practitioners? Or are they
tied to reimbursement? Are emergency physicians more likely to
include counseling in their practice if it is a billable service?
What other barriers must be removed or systems changes made before
SBI is successful in an ED? Available resources are essential, as
well as perceived support and role models.7 A great deal of time is
spent developing continuous quality improvement projects in EDs for
problems with far less prevalence. Return visits and deaths are
often tracked. Why not include patients with alcohol problems in
this process?
What exactly is included in educational programs for
providers?
Standard didactic educational programs have not been shown to
change
physician behavior and subsequently improve patient care.8
However,
evidence indicates that skills-based interactive sessions can
change practice.9,10
How do we measure success?
What outcomes are we measuring? Do they include a decrease in
alcohol consumption or decreases in negative consequences, such as
drinking and driving violations or school and work problems? A
decrease in morbidity and mortality may be more difficult to
measure and require a lengthy follow-up period, but it provides
much more meaningful data to the practicing emergency physician. It
is also possible that tracking
referrals to primary care or specialized treatment programs may
be an important outcome. Rates of enrollment in treatment programs
and compliance with appointments may be meaningful outcomes.
How long one brief intervention may affect patients' behavior is
unclear. ED providers have no formal relationships with the
patients beyond the index visit, and it is entirely plausible that
the effect of the brief intervention may be short lived. Therefore,
certain outcomes may need to be measured early at one or three
months. However, one may also argue that it is possible that there
may be a "sleeper effect," or delayed emergence of treatment
efficacy, as described by O'Malley and Carroll,11,12 making it
imperative that assessments be continued for one year or more.
All of these questions need to be answered in future studies if
we are to prove that SBI is effective in the ED setting. It is
crucial that researchers are clear on all aspects of their research
protocols so that future projects can either replicate or build on
past experiences. These aspects include exclusion and inclusion
criteria, the specifics of the intervention (i.e., what, how, and
by whom), and the specific outcomes to be measured. Adherence to
the protocol should also be assured.
In conclusion, there is no "silver bullet," or one exact
intervention that will work for everybody. We must focus on small,
incremental steps and realize that the entire process will be a
long one. Fortunately, the number of ideas and research questions
are endless, allowing for multiple studies and a great deal of
creativity on the part of the researchers.
References
1. D'Onofrio G, Degutis LC. Preventative care in the emergency
department: screening and brief intervention for alcohol problems
in the eergency department: a systematic review. Acad Emerg Med
2002;9(6):627-38.
2. Cherpitel CJ. Drinking patterns and problems: a comparison
of primary care with the emergency room. J Subst Abuse
1999;20:85-95.
3. D'Onofrio G, Bernstein E, Bernstein J. The Emergency
Physician and the Problem Drinker: Motivating Patients for Change.
[videocassette] South Natick (MA): Marino & Company Production;
1997.
4. Miller WR, Sanchez VC. Motivating young adults for treatment
and lifestyle change. In: Howard G, editor. Issues in Alcohol Use
and Misuse in Young Adults. Notre Dame (IN): University of Notre
Dame Press; 1993. p. 55-82.
5. Bernstein E, Bernstein J, Levenson S. Project ASSERT: an ED
based intervention to increase access to primary care, preventive
services, and the substance abuse treatment system. Ann Emerg Med
1997;30:181-9.
6. Rhodes KV, Lauderdale DS, Stocking CB, Howes DS, Roizen MF,
Levinson W. Better health while you wait: a controlled trial of a
computer-based intervention for screening and health promotion in
the emergency department. Ann Emerg Med 2001;37:284-91.
7. Cartwright AKJ. The attitudes of helping agents towards the
alcoholic client: The influence of experience, support, training,
and self-esteem. Br J Addict 1980; 75:413-31.
8. Davis DA, Thamson MA, Oxman AD, Haynes RB. Changing
physician performance: a systematic review of the effect of
continuing medical education strategies. JAMA 1995;274:700-5.
9. Davis D, Obrien MAT, Freemantle N, Wolf FM, Mazmanian P,
Taylor-Vaisy A. Impact of formal continuing medical education: do
conferences, workshops, rounds, and other traditional continuing
education activities change physician behavior or health care
outcomes? JAMA 1999;282:867-74.
10. Saitz R, Sullivan LM, Samet JH. Training community-based
clinicians in screening and brief intervention for substance abuse
problems: translating evidence into practice. J Subst Abuse
2000;21:21-31.
11. O'Malley SS, Jaffe AJ, Chang G, Rode S, Schottenfeld R,
Meyer RE, Rounsaville B. Six-month follow-up of Naltrexone and
psychotherapy for alcohol dependence. Arch Gen Psychiatry
1996;53:217-24.
12. Carroll K, Rounsaville BJ, Nich C, Gordon LT, Wirtz PW,
Gawin F. One-year follow-up of psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy
for cocaine dependence: delayed emergency of psychotherapy effects.
Arch Gen Psychiatry 1994;51:989-97.


Intervening with Alcohol Problems in
Emergency Medicine:
Discussion of the DiClementi and Soderstrom Article

Kristen Lawton Barry, PhD
Reducing death and disability related to alcohol remains a
national health status goal.1,2 Cherpitel and others have suggested
that the emergency department (ED) may be the ideal place to
identify alcohol problems and to begin interventions, particularly
with patients who enter the ED with an injury.3-10 Several
compelling reasons make the ED an important setting for alcohol
interventions. First, a large number and variety of patients are
seen in EDs every year. Second, many of the patients who use the ED
do not have their hazardous drinking detected or treated in other
primary or tertiary care settings. Third, most patients with
alcohol problems are released from the ED rather than being
admitted to hospitals where detection may be more likely. Finally,
for patients seen in the ED, there can be an immediacy between the
event bringing them to this setting (e.g., injuries) and possible
identification of and intervention for an alcohol problem.
Logistical challenges to brief interventions in the ED
The ED presents unique challenges, however, for identifying and
intervening with patients who drink at a hazardous level. The ED is
a fast-paced environment with many competing demands that do not
allow for concentrated periods of personnel time devoted to
intervening with long-term problems, even if the problems are
related to a particular ED visit. It is of great importance to
develop intervention strategies that can be used easily and
efficiently in this setting.
Medical care challenges in the ED
In addition to the practical problems generally associated with
screening and intervention in this venue, pressing problems in the
delivery of medical care will affect how we intervene in the future
with ED patients at risk for and currently experiencing problem
drinking. By 2020, there will be a serious shortage of nursing
personnel available to work in this and other medical settings.11
This shortage will come at a time when the
Baby Boom generation is reaching retirement age and having more
health-related problems that lead to greater use of urgent care and
emergency facilities. In fact, EDs are already seeing greater
numbers of patients at a time when hospitals are closing. This
critical health care shortage could exacerbate a vicious cycle of
need for care and difficulty providing that care.
DiClemente and Soderstrom have produced a well-crafted,
state-of-the-art article and presentation about the need for,
importance of, and challenges in conducting research on the
efficacy and ultimate effectiveness of brief alcohol interventions
in the ED for persons who are at-risk drinkers, problem drinkers,
or alcohol-dependent drinkers. It is clear from their manuscript
that a spectrum of alcohol problems presents in the ED and that a
spectrum of solutions is necessary to meet the challenges of
providing "best practices" care.
Issues raised by DiClemente and Soderstrom
This response to DiClemente and Soderstrom's conference
presentation briefly addresses issues raised by Dr. DiClementi,
primarily the need for considering the use of technology to augment
or deliver brief alcohol interventions in the ED. Previous research
has shown that brief interventions for hazardous drinking are
effective in reducing drinking levels across of variety of health
care settings, including the ED.12-17 However, the sample sizes,
attrition rates, types of interventions, levels of alcohol use,
outcomes measured, and effect sizes have varied greatly across the
studies. In addition, the target of the intervention (at-risk
drinkers, problem drinkers, alcohol-dependent drinkers) and the
mechanism of intervention (physician, nursing staff, social
workers, technology with or without provider advice) remain open
questions.
Brief alcohol interventions have generally included feedback by
a health care professional based on patients' responses (screening
positive) to questions about alcohol consumption or consequences.
These results indicate that while this approach is effective for a
percentage of hazardous drinkers, it is not effective for everyone
(effect sizes of ~30% to 40%). The intervention studies based on
provider feedback and advice to the patient have had mixed results
in the ED. In addition, it remains difficult to engage health care
professionals in conducting brief interventions in this venue
because of the volume of patients and the urgency of other
presenting problems. It is becoming clear that, to be widely
effective, an ED-based brief alcohol intervention model that
requires providers to give advice and written materials to the
screen-positive patients will need some modification.
Two concepts that appear often in the literature may be useful
in informing future research. First, the ED potentially provides an
ideal "teachable moment" for patients who have problems with
alcohol use. It is thought that this is particularly true if the
patient's use can be tied to the reason for the ED visit. However,
it may also be anticipated that using the ED visit as a teachable
moment may be effective for non-injured persons who drink at risk
excessively. Second, the ED is a fast-paced environment in which
providers cannot easily find time to conduct brief alcohol
interventions, even if they have the training, skills, and desire
to do so. The concept of the teachable moment, although only a
conceptualization at this time, provides part of the seminal
interest in doing alcohol interventions in the ED. On the other
hand, the fast pace of the ED may play a role in why providers find
it difficult to address alcohol issues at all, particularly for
those patients who do not present in the ED with problems or
conditions clearly linked to alcohol consumption.
The implementation of brief alcohol intervention systems in
"real world" emergency medical practice has not been easy. This has
been true in primary care settings as well. Efficacy trials are the
first step, but implementation of proven alcohol screening and
brief intervention systems in hospital- and community-based
settings has been the most difficult part of the process. Serious
logistical challenges remain in developing systems that facilitate
the use of these techniques on a regular basis.
The combination of the potential opportunity to affect the
alcohol consumption of at-risk drinkers and the limited time for
providers to intervene, along with the higher volume and projected
shortages of nursing personnel, necessitates the need to expand
research on brief alcohol interventions specifically with the use
of new technology. The use of technology may reduce the time needed
for providers and staff to personally provide screening and
intervention services and target patients who can derive benefit
from the brief intervention messages.
In addition, because of the effect sizes shown by the studies to
date, there is also a need to target responses and elements of the
brief intervention to the problems specific to each individual
patient who scores
positive for at-risk drinking or more serious alcohol-related
problems. The use of new technologies for individualizing brief
intervention materials and feedback may help to fill gaps in the
system of care for patients with at-risk and problem drinking
patterns.
This is a large challenge and a large expectation for any one
system of intervention. Just as there is a spectrum of alcohol use
problems, there may be a family of solutions. These solutions will
need to address both the types of interventions that best fit each
ED and medical center and the specific problems of the patient.
"One size fits all" does not work in brief interventions, just as
it does not work in clinical practice in general. Taking a public
health perspective, methods are sought that are the most effective
clinically and financially.
New directions in brief alcohol interventions in emergency
medicine
One of the innovations being tested at this time is the use of
automated computerized screening with real-time production of brief
workbook content tailored to specific problems. The use of
computerized, tailored messaging represents an important technique
to provide targeted, individualized feedback to patients considered
most open to change messages. Tailored messaging systems have been
found effective in the areas of depression, smoking cessation,
dietary intake, and use of mammography.18
Other technologies that may be useful in the future include the
use of interactive voice recognition (IVR) technology to facilitate
screening, delivery of educational interventions, and follow-up of
patient progress by telephone. IVR telephone availability 24
hours/day could facilitate follow-up of ED patients. Interactive
computer programs on laptops or palm computers, web-based
interventions, computerized bundling of brief health messages for
multiple health risks (e.g., smoking, alcohol use, seat belt use),
and audio interventions tailored to specific problems and delivered
through headsets19 are also being posited as potential approaches
in emergency and urgent care settings.
Some of these technologies have been raised because of system
barriers to provider-based interventions. The use of technology
(e.g., hand-held computerized screening, interactive headphone
delivery of messages, tailored messaging booklets) to assist in
interventions in a
crowded, busy venue may allow a level of privacy that addresses
the shame and stigma many individuals feel about problems related
to alcohol misuse and abuse.
Patients in the emergency setting range from those with no
alcohol problems to those with severe dependence. In the next few
years, a variety of exciting intervention techniques will be tested
in EDs and urgent care clinics. Drs. DiClemente and Soderstrom have
set the stage for us to think about what is needed in the future to
provide best practices care to patients with problems related to
alcohol use. Any methods that are developed with researchers and
clinicians working together will help to overcome barriers and
promote best practices care for a range of drinkers in the
emergency setting.
References
1. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Healthy People
2000. National promotion and disease prevention objectives.
Washington (DC): U.S. Department of Health and Human Services;
1990. DHHS Publication No. (PHS) 91-50212.
2. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Healthy People
2010: Understanding and Improving Health. 2nd ed. Washington (DC):
U.S. Government Printing Office; 2000.
3. Cherpitel CJ. Breath analysis and self-reports as measures
of alcohol-related emergency room admission. J Stud Alcohol
1989;50:155-61.
4. Cherpitel CJ. Alcohol, Injury, and risk-taking behavior:
data from a national sample. Alcohol Clin Exp Res
1993;17(4):762-6.
5. Dewey KE. Alcohol related attendances at the accident and
emergency department. Ulster Med J 1993;62(1):58-62.
6. Zink BJ, Maio RF. Alcohol use and trauma. Acad Emerg Med
1994;1(2):171-3.
7. Maio RF. Alcohol and injury in the emergency department:
opportunities for intervention. Ann Emerg Med 1995;26:221-3.
8. Dyehouse JM, Sommers MS. Brief interventions after
alcohol-related injuries. Substance abuse interventions in general
nursing practice. Nurs Clin North Am 1998;33(1):93-104.
9. Longabough R, Minugh PA, Nirenberg TD, Clifford PR, Becker
B, Woolard R. Injury as a motivator to reduce drinking. Acad Emerg
Med 1995;2(9):817-25.
10. Sommers MS, Dyehouse JM, Howe SR, Lemmink J, Davise K,
McCarthy M, Russlee AC. Attribution of injury to alcohol
involvement in young adults seriously injured in alcohol-related
motor vehicle crashes. Am J Crit Care 2000; 9:28-35.
11. Buerhaus PI, Staiger DO, Auerbach DI. Implications of an
aging registered nurse workforce. JAMA 2000;283(22):2948-54.
12. Chick J, Lloyd G, Crombie E. Counseling problem drinkers in
medical wards: a controlled study. Br Med J 1985;290,965-7.
13. Babor TF, Grant M. Project on Identification and Management
of Alcohol-related Problems. Report on Phase II: A Randomized
Clinical Trial of Brief Interventions in Primary Health Care.
Geneva: World Health Organization; 1992.
14. Fleming MF, Barry KL, Manwell LB, Johnson K, London R.
Brief
physician advice for problem alcohol drinkers: a randomized
controlled
trial in community-based primary care practices. JAMA
1997;277(13):1039-45.

15. Wright S, Moran L, Meyrick M, O'Connor R, Tourquet R.
Intervention by an
alcohol health worker in an accident and emergency
department. Alcohol Alcohol
1998;33(6):651-6.

16. Dinh-Zarr T, Diguiseppi C, Heitman E, Roberts I. Preventing
injuries
through interventions for problem drinking: a systematic
review of randomized
controlled trials. Alcohol Alcohol 1999;34:609-21.

17. Gentilello LM, Rivara FP, Donovan DM, Jurkovich GJ,
Daranciang E, Dunn
CW, et al. Alcohol interventions in a trauma center as a
means of reducing the
risk of injury recurrance. Ann Surg 1999;230:473-83.

18. Strecher VJ, Kreuter MW, DenBoer DJ, Kobrin SC, Hospers HJ,
Skinner CS.
The effects of computer-tailored smoking cessation messages
in family practice
settings. J Fam Pract 1994;39:262-70.

19. Blow FC, Barry KL. Older Patients with at-risk and problem
drinking
patterns: new developments in brief interventions. J Geriatr
Psychiatry
Neurol 2000; 13(3):115-23.



General Discussion
Richard Longabaugh commented on how much remains unknown about
what motivates patients to change their use of alcohol. He noted
that researchers at Brown previously had found that readiness to
change was predicted by whether or not patients attributed their ED
injury visit to their drinking. They expected the same result in
their new study with hazardous drinkers who had a positive BAC at
the time of their injury visit. However, they were surprised to
find that regardless of whether the injury was attributed to
alcohol or not, patients did equally well at follow-up.
Consequently, the motivational mechanism is not clear. Another
surprise was that in the new study, a single intervention session
at the time of the emergency visit made no difference in any
outcome measures at either 3 months or 1 year. Patients who
returned 7 to 10 days later for a second intervention session did
not improve on outcomes at 3 months, but they did improve on
alcohol-related negative consequences and injuries at 1 year.
Two-thirds of the patients returned for a second session, but that
proportion varied from one-third to 90% across the different
interventionists.
Kristen Barry noted that in primary care studies, one session
seems to be enough to foster change. However, she found it
interesting that booster sessions worked in this setting. Even
though the intervention did not decrease drinking, it did decrease
drinking-related consequences, which may be part of what we're
looking for in this setting.
Carlo DiClemente said the message needs to be reinforced after
discharge. In his work, they are using a feedback letter and phone
calls at two weeks and six weeks. He noted that Longabaugh's data
indicate there is benefit from a post-discharge contact and that we
will see if other studies confirm that.
Herman Diesenhaus added that there must be some type of
maintenance activity if we are dealing with a chronic, relapsing
condition. The research questions are how to determine which
patients need maintenance activities, what types of activities they
need, and when or how often they are needed.
Christopher Dunn related that his research interventions took 30
to 40 minutes, but his interventions outside the research arena
took about 20 minutes because the process did not have to be so
complicated and uniform, and there was less data collection. He
observed that the first question of the SMAST ("Do you think you're
a normal drinker?") forced people to label and marginalize
themselves. This had created many difficulties during his
interventions. He noted that he prefers the AUDIT. An original goal
of the study was to encourage post-discharge alcohol treatment, but
only 5% to 10% of study patients went to at least one treatment or
Alcoholics Anonymous session. Consequently, he questioned how
important that goal should be. Very few patients refused to speak
to him or had problems with privacy during the interview. Family
members were present less than 10% of the time, and their impact on
the intervention varied. He noted that even though interventions
are evidence-based, organizations and interventionists in
non-research settings will make an intervention their own. In any
case, he observed, even in the existing randomized trials of
interventions that use motivational interviewing, we cannot
evaluate the effect of counselors' skill levels. In future trials,
he recommended that the fidelity of the intervention and variations
among interventionists be more closely monitored.
Barry agreed that we have not monitored closely enough what
intervention is being delivered by the interventionists we train.
The good news is that across many trials, the interventions being
delivered seem to work. She also agreed that the first question of
the SMAST is problematic. She noted that the short and long MAST
for geriatric patients have been modified, eliminating the
problems.
Peter Monti agreed with Dunn that measuring treatment fidelity
is extremely important. He cited a brief report and an upcoming
chapter in a book about interventions with adolescents that
describes how studies at Brown evaluate fidelity. He also noted
that none of the three clinical trials (Gentillelo's with trauma
patients, his own with adolescents, and Longabaugh's in the ED)
used physicians or ED staff to conduct interventions. He
recommended that future research evaluate whether using physicians
or ED staff is more cost effective than using specially hired
staff. He wondered if using ED physicians could increase treatment
efficacy enough to offset the added cost of training and possible
decreased delivery of interventions. He also noted that given
the costs and difficulties of the ED setting, the relative
efficacy and cost of booster sessions is another important issue
deserving further research. In his continuing trial, he should be
able to address this question because adolescents will be
randomized to booster sessions or a single session. Although his
study of adolescents found reductions in risky behavior and
alcohol-related harm, he was disappointed to find no effect on
drinking. Given the harmful levels of drinking among adolescents in
his studies, he remarked that it is irresponsible for interventions
not to focus on drinking as well as harm.
Gail D'Onofrio noted that her planned study will use physicians,
physician assistants, and senior emergency medicine residents to
deliver brief interventions for injured and non-injured harmful and
hazardous drinkers. The study will allocate resources to promote
adherence to the treatment protocol and monitor treatment fidelity.
It also will control for ancillary treatments that might influence
intervention outcome.
Edward Bernstein noted that Project Assert adapted a
readiness-to-change instrument for use in the ED. Patients were
asked to place themselves on a readiness scale of 1 to 10. If
patients rated themselves on the low end of the scale, researchers
then asked them what would bring them to a higher score.
DiClemente commented that such adjustments to instruments are
often necessary. In assessing change, interventionists can use
three markers to help them: importance, confidence, and
readiness.
Barry praised the use of a linear method to measure stages of
change. She added that an in-home, brief intervention linked with
primary care found no association between stage of change and
outcome. She thought more research is needed on this issue.
Daniel Hungerford noted that there are operational realities in
the emergency department that must be considered in order to
implement interventions. At the same time, some central questions
need to be submitted to empirical testing. The screening and brief
intervention trial he and colleagues conducted in West Virginia did
not include a booster session and had a mode intervention time of
about 14 minutes. Although outcomes for the experimental and
control groups were not significantly different at 3 months,
outcomes improved for both groups
compared to baseline. At 12 months, outcomes for both groups
were still not different, but the percentage of patients who had
improved had decreased and was no longer significantly different
from baseline. He concluded that a brief intervention might have a
short-lived effect that degrades over time. Consequently, a booster
intervention might be helpful. His second point was that there is
an easy assumption that a brief intervention is more appropriate
for patients with mild-to-moderate problems than for patients with
severe problems. It is thought they are more likely to respond
successfully. The West Virginia project is on a college campus.
Many of the college students who visit the ED have mild alcohol
problems and are confident they could overcome their alcohol
problems if they wanted to. However, most of them do not feel this
issue is important enough to address. At follow-up, it is the
non-students and students with more severe problems who are more
likely to improve. He concluded we should not trust easy
assumptions, but instead treat them as empirical questions.
Barry reinforced the importance of looking at this issue by age
groups, noting that young adult males were least affected by
interventions in the Wisconsin early intervention study. She
concurred with Hungerford's observation that intervention effects
seem to wear off after a period of time. She suggested that
although booster interventions are needed, perhaps they are not
needed very often, particularly in primary care settings.
Maintenance of effect might be possible with yearly
consultations.
DiClemente noted that some trials have found patients with more
severe problems being helped; others have helped patients with more
moderate problems. Readiness to change may or may not be related to
problem severity. Similarly, readiness to cut down may not coincide
with readiness to abstain. Patients who are more ready to cut down
are generally less ready to abstain. There is strong evidence that
readiness to change and confidence, especially before treatment,
are unrelated. Sophisticated research is required to tease apart
the complex interactions between these variables.
D'Onofrio agreed that methodological issues are extremely
important. She noted that research studies often attempt to control
so many variables and follow up with patients so frequently that
control groups receive so much attention focused on alcohol that it
may constitute an
intervention, particularly when compared with patients who
receive standard care. Even if the assessment is embedded in a
general health-needs survey, patients know they are being asked
about alcohol, and that could affect their answers. These
methodological problems can mask valid intervention effects.
Monti believed that a decision to screen only for patients with
severe alcohol problems is premature. In his study of adolescents,
he saw a decrease in drinking among all groups. However, the only
patients who showed a differential effect from the brief
intervention were precontemplators in the 13- to 17-year-old group.
For younger children, he concluded, the emergency room visit was a
powerful event.
Robert Woolard related that many ED patients they approached to
participate in research still had measurable blood alcohol levels.
Brown's IRB required a mental status exam to ensure patients could
understand the research dimensions of the project before they could
be enrolled in the study. Therefore, the study was able to
correlate mental status exam scores with alcohol levels at the time
of consent. Patients with BACs of 0.10 and 0.08 g/dl had impaired
mental status, mostly in short-term memory. He wondered at what
blood alcohol level patients could remember an intervention. If
they had had to wait until patients were sober, many would be
discharged because in his ED, patients are discharged when staff
estimate their BAC is below 0.08 g/dl.
DiClemente reported that most of the people who got the longer
intervention in his study remembered the interventionist at the
two-week follow-up, so there was some recall.
Richard Brown commented on high up-front costs required to
develop technological means of delivering these services, such as
computer-based screening. He said funding mechanisms such as small
business grants were not always appropriate for researchers and
wondered whether there were other funding mechanisms that might be
more appropriate.
Barry replied that her group had used the R-01 grant programs to
help develop or adapt technology, but she admitted that R-01 grants
can be difficult and time-consuming to obtain.
Brown replied that only a certain proportion of the funding can
be applied toward development in R-01 grants, and some of the
technology, for example interactive videos, can be quite expensive
to develop.
Elinor Walker reminded the group that the Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality has an R-03 program with a $100,000 cap,
including both direct and indirect costs. She noted that these
projects are reviewed by a study section, but one that may be more
forgiving than R-01 study sections. However, the program is still
quite competitive, and the project would probably have to involve
testing as well as development.
Longabaugh noted that R-21 grants, which are available for
development of treatments, could be used to develop
technologies.
Mary Dufour observed that there are few applicants who are
skilled at both the research and the business aspects of a project,
so small business grants seldom go to people in the scientific
community. If applicants want to go that route, she recommended
they get help from someone well-versed in business.
Marilyn Sommers related her experience from two clinical trials
among hospitalized patients. In both, nurse clinicians, all female,
implemented the study. Because the trauma population is mostly
young, male, and not always easy to work with, the gender of the
interventionist could be important. Perhaps physicians, especially
male physicians, have more authority in that population, which may
affect whether patients take advice. She observed that the gender
of both interventionists and patients has not been well documented
in studies. This can make it difficult to standardize
interventions. She hypothesized that under-standing the patient's
perception of the interventionist's capabilities might be as
important as having detailed measurements of intervention fidelity
across interventionists. She noted that many researchers feel
rushed to move these interventions into clinical settings because
they know we need to be addressing alcohol problems. She asked the
panel how to balance this need with the many important scientific
questions that still need to be answered.
DiClemente observed that Project MATCH had examined associations
between gender and treatment outcome and found that females did
better in 12-step programs. However, to examine the effect of
matching interventionists and patients would require randomizing
large numbers of patients to a large number of interventionists. He
agreed that the authority issue is important, but he suggested
smaller, targeted research studies could address that question. He
cautioned that not every study has to be a clinical trial focused
on outcomes. To examine the issue of gender, patients could be
randomized to interventionists and both could be asked to evaluate
their perceptions of the interaction. He noted that the balance
between research and clinical practice is always a challenge. He
posed the following questions: Do we wait until we know exactly how
the intervention works before we move interventions into practice?
Or, do we start in a practice setting and keep refining as we go
along? His sense was that the field would benefit from starting in
the practice setting to learn how interventions work in real-world
clinical settings. As research evidence accumulates, it can inform
best practices.
Barry described two intervention trials among older adults in
primary care. Interventions performed by physicians in one trial
had results as good as interventions performed by social workers
and psychologists in the other. Although she thought age of the
interventionist could be an influential factor, she was unsure
because there are so many interactions and factors that we have not
looked at very carefully.
D'Onofrio, in response to Sommer's concerns, suggested that a
patient might be more receptive to nurses than physicians because
they are less authoritative and more nurturing, and they listen
better. So the reverse hypothesis could be just as valid.
Sommers suggested that some of these questions could be
addressed by pooling data sets from existing clinical trials and
hoped this conference would be a step in that direction.
Longabaugh noted one matching effect that persisted throughout
the post-treatment period in Project MATCH. Clients with high trait
anger, who were therefore likely to resist directive interventions,
were more successful with a motivational enhancement intervention.
Other clients
were more successful with directive treatment interventions such
as a 12-step approach or cognitive behavioral therapy. He remarked
that it would be possible to evaluate this association by matching
patients' likelihood to accept directive interventions to either
brief, directive physician-implemented interventions or
specialist-based motivational interventions. He added that the
literature shows client outcomes and cost-benefits are improved by
either research follow-up or a brief monitoring phone call.
Finally, he suggested that the patient's level of distress could
influence motivational level as much as the severity of a patient's
alcohol problems.
Robert Lowe speculated that the current situation represents
both a unique opportunity for an intervention in the emergency
department and a failure of the primary care system. The ED seems
like an appropriate venue for alcohol interventions because many ED
patients have alcohol problems and the ED visit may represent a
teachable moment. However, primary care is responsible for the
first contact as well as comprehensive, continuous care. If many
patients have no primary care or primary care providers do not
screen for alcohol-related problems, then primary care has failed.
When the ED is essentially making up for the failures of primary
care, perhaps focusing on the ED for interventions is not the most
strategic approach. He then asked how EDs should use their limited
resources. Should they be screening for patients with the worst
problems? Or, are these patients the least likely to respond to
interventions available in the ED? If milder cases are more likely
to respond, perhaps they should be a higher priority.
D'Onofrio noted that many young, healthy patients do not go to
their primary care provider, even if they have one. Even with
managed care efforts to decrease expensive ED visits, the number of
ED patients has increased, so primary care and EDs have to work
together. Since brief intervention does not work with severely
dependent patients, ED-based interventions should refer patients to
treatment. She added that when she has not been able to reach
everyone, she responds to patients who request help. However,
patients who have not considered asking for help may make progress
toward getting help because of a connection made by an ED
intervention.
Barry agreed that difficult cases do take most of the time and
resources currently spent on alcohol problems in the ED. She noted
that we have to help patients who have severe alcohol problems.
However, she believed that it is also important to use resources to
reach as many people as possible and that systems currently exist
that, once refined, can be fairly easy to implement.
DiClemente pointed out that in an ideal world, primary care
would provide consistent contact, and interventions could happen
over time. However, until that happens, other systems will have to
pick up what falls through the cracks. Providing resources in the
emergency setting has implications for the primary care setting. We
need to be figuring out how to connect primary care and emergency
care settings rather than splitting them apart.
Gordon Smith described difficulties he had had with his IRB in a
study on drinking and boating injuries. He suggested that the final
report from the conference include a section that addresses the
difficult human subjects issues involved in working with
intoxicated patients, such as protocols and procedures that IRBs
found unacceptable.
Barry noted that because of human subjects violations and the
way human subjects committees have handled their paperwork, whole
programs have been shut down. As a result, human subjects
committees have been under intense scrutiny. She pointed out that
even ongoing programs have been re-scrutinized and required to make
protocol changes. However, standards seem to vary across
committees.
Smith noted that this variation is the problem and why he wants
these concerns to be addressed by the conference in written
form.
Charles Bombardier noted that the rate of spontaneous remission
could minimize the differences between experimental and control
groups. This problem makes it difficult to determine the
appropriate time to schedule outcome assessments and booster
interventions. He suggested a number of factors that might
influence spontaneous remission such as an injury, type and
severity of injury, degree of alcohol dependence, readiness to
change, and marital or employment status. He thought natural
history
studies or pooling of control group data might better identify
predictors. More data on this issue could help us plan better
controlled trials-who to target, when to follow up, and when to
give boosters.
Ronald Maio reported that other investigators shared their
protocols with him and this helped his IRB clearance process go
more smoothly. He noted that most brief intervention studies in EDs
have focused on injured patients, but that 70% to 80% of ED
patients do not present with an injury. He wondered how much of
what we learn from the injury patients can be applied to patients
who are not injured.
D'Onofrio replied that her study was looking at both injured and
non-injured patients. She noted that primary care studies and Ed
Bernstein's ED project do give us experience with non-injured
patients.
DiClemente added that his study was also for both groups and
most primary care studies involve non-injured patients. He thought
their findings help support work with non-injured patients in the
emergency department setting as well.
Patricia Perry reported that one alcohol intervention project in
New York State was implemented in 18 hospitals, but in a different
way in each one. She observed that after interventions have been
shown to be effective, they will have to be adapted to new
settings. She suggested we must identify the essential elements of
interventions that are required in any new setting. Another lesson
from the New York project was that each site must have a champion.
She observed that it would be useful to know in advance how to
identify whom that champion might be. She added that physician
buy-in is critical to overcoming professional resistance, and that
it is important to identify additional partners who can move
intervention services forward in a particular setting or
institution.
D'Onofrio remarked that when it comes to brief interventions,
many physicians are pre-contemplators. She suggested that changing
physician behavior can incorporate the same concepts that are
applied to changing patient behavior.
Jean Shope expressed her belief that addressing alcohol problems
in the emergency department is the failure not just of primary
care, but of many systems. Her work has been in substance abuse
prevention in schools, where she encountered many social and legal
beliefs that ran counter to her prevention education efforts. She
believed that the ED setting is just one of many where alcohol
problems should be addressed.
Thomas Babor wondered whether a couple of unquestioned
assumptions had arisen during discussions at the conference. The
first was that because time and resources are limited in the
emergency department, interventions should be simplified and
limited in scope. The second was that we may have difficulty
selling alcohol interventions because they are in competition with
other types of interventions such as helmet use, seat belt use, or
smoking prevention. He suggested that making interventions more
ambitious and partnering with other programs that also are looking
at behavioral risk factors might get us a more prominent place on
the agenda. He suggested that the scientific question is whether we
can intervene effectively and simultaneously for the top two or
three risk factors that often overlap in these populations. If the
science showed we could, the policy question would be whether we
could get a bigger place on the agenda if we partner with other
programs.
DiClemente recalled that we used to think a patient could not
quit smoking and drinking at the same time. Recent data have shown
that not to be true. He also observed that patients who screen
positive for one risk factor often have multiple risk factors. The
patient could decide how many risk factors could be addressed at
one time. A problem arises when the factors the patient wants to
work on are not the same ones the provider thinks are most
important or is most prepared to deal with. There are few "pure"
alcoholics anymore. Most use other substances as well, so it is
important to be able to intervene for a variety of problems. This
is a real challenge for policy, institutional systems, and
professionals. We will have to change our thinking and consider the
many conditions for which we could intervene.
Barry surmised that grant proposals to look at more than one
health behavior at a time had already been submitted, but she did
not know if they had been funded.
In response, Dunn described a 15-minute ED-based intervention
funded to change six behaviors among youth: not wearing bike
helmets, failing to use seat belts, carrying a weapon, binge
drinking, riding with a drinking driver, and drinking and driving.
However, the protocol did not ask patients which behaviors they
were motivated to change. The intervention led to a small change in
bike helmet use and a slightly larger change in seat belt use, but
it did not lead to changes in alcohol variables or weapon
carrying.
D'Onofrio observed that both Project Assert and her project
funded by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation provided intervention
for multiple behaviors, and that brief interventions for all
behaviors were based on the same principles. She reasoned that
there were so many risk factors that should be addressed that some
sort of bundling would be necessary. She said that the prevalence
of alcohol problems was higher than other risk factors. Physicians
frequently ask about tetanus immunizations even though almost none
have ever seen a case of tetanus. They readily ask about seat belts
and distribute handouts about various behaviors. She believed that
time is not the issue as much as redirecting the focus of the
interaction during their time with the patient.
Barry suggested that funding sources may have to become partners
before support for the bundling of interventions could become a
reality.
David Lewis commented that during the last five years, patients
have been bringing a great deal of information to medical
encounters. People actually bring printouts of questions to ask
their primary care physicians. Due to the amount of information now
available, power has shifted from the physician to the patient. He
would like to see more thinking about how these changes should be
incorporated into research and more strategies that piggy-back on
this information revolution and shift in power.
Guohua Li disagreed with DiClemente that the efficacy of brief
intervention in emergency settings had been established. He
believed studies from England and New Zealand should be viewed very
critically because access to health care is easier than in the
United States. He believed that
studies in American emergency settings have provided
inconclusive evidence that brief intervention works. He cautioned
that literature reviews generally do not include all relevant
studies because studies with negative results are seldom
published.
DiClemente agreed that efficacy in the ED setting had not been
totally established. He noted that many practices that do not have
efficacy or effectiveness studies behind them are adopted and
become guidelines for standard practice. Once that happens, it is
very difficult to get support to re-evaluate them, so it is true we
must be careful when evaluating social science and psycho-social
interventions. However, we are so sophisticated psychometrically
and methodologically that virtually every piece of research can be
dissected, revealing flaws and problems. If we continue to do that,
we will never make any changes in services. He recommended a
balance between the rigor of research and the application process
that needs to happen.







Session 4.
Implementing Preventive Interventions in
Emergency Medicine: Strategic Considerations

Larry M. Gentilello, MD
Individuals who may benefit from alcohol counseling are often
unaware of their need for treatment. The provision of alcohol
interventions in emergency departments (ED) may provide an
opportunity to treat individuals who are currently not actively
seeking such care. Due to their lack of awareness of their problem,
these patients are unlikely to present for treatment on their
own.
Treatment does not need to be sought actively to be effective.1
How-ever, motivation can facilitate treatment. Studies suggest that
physicians can opportunistically capitalize on the motivating
effects of acute injuries or medical conditions that require
emergency care to convince patients of the need for behavior
change.2 This process may identify patients who have not yet
developed severe dependence, thereby pre-venting the development of
more intractable stages of alcoholism. Finally, such interventions
may have the potential to decrease repeated use of emergency
department resources.3
Randomized trials of inexpensive screening and intervention
protocols that are feasible for use in the brief contact setting of
the emergency department have been shown empirically to be
effective when used in a variety of settings outside the ED.2-6 A
recent analysis of 12 randomized trials, each of which was limited
to one session and consisted of less than one hour of motivational
counseling, demonstrated that heavy drinkers were twice as likely
to moderate their drinking when compared with those who did not
receive an intervention.7
Brief interventions were specifically designed to target
patients who are drinking at hazardous levels but have not become
dependent. Some patients treated in emergency departments need more
intensive treatment such as inpatient or outpatient therapy or
participation in self-help groups. Brief interventions may be used
to motivate such patients to seek or accept a referral to more
intensive treatment.8
As proven alcohol interventions emerge, a systematic effort is
needed to incorporate them into emergency department practice. The
public policy objectives of Healthy People 2010 include routine
emergency department screening.9
The provision of such interventions is currently not routine. A
variety of changes at the individual, system, and policy level will
be needed to accomplish this goal. This paper describes the factors
that have limited the provision of alcohol intervention and
counseling in emergency departments and provides an agenda to
foster their implementation.
Knowledge and attitudes of emergency department staff
Physician advocacy plays an important role in influencing
screening practices by increasing awareness of the problem and by
generating support for screening and intervention services. A
survey of surgeons working in an emergency department found that
the most significant predictor of screening was the attending
physicians' perception that their responsibilities included
screening.10 However, 81% did not routinely screen, and 75% did not
believe that screening was the responsibility of emergency
department staff. Routine screening and intervention will require
engendering a sense of role responsibility among emergency
department clinicians towards addressing substance abuse.
This shift will require correcting misconceptions about the
validity and generalizability of treatment research results and
their relevance to the emergency department population.11,12 The
literature suggests that these misconceptions are the result of a
relative lack of physician education and training in substance
abuse.10,13-18
In the survey mentioned previously, 83% of respondents indicated
that they had no prior training in screening or detection of
alcohol problems, and more than 75% were not familiar with any of
the commonly used alcohol screening questionnaires, such as the
CAGE or MAST.19,20 Another survey found that less than 25% of
emergency medicine residency programs teach residents about the
quantity/ frequency of alcohol use questions needed to establish an
early diagnosis of an alcohol-related disorder.21 A more recent
survey of program directors found that the average emergency
medicine residency program devotes only three curricular hours to
substance abuse training.22
The lack of education about screening is illustrated by the fact
that the most commonly cited reason for failure to screen is lack
of time.10
However, an effective battery of screening tools that require
minimal time and disruption to implement is already available. A
screening blood alcohol level can be obtained easily when blood is
drawn for other purposes. A simple questionnaire such as the CAGE
can easily be incorporated into a routine history and physical
examination. Detecting hazardous drinking in the absence of
dependence can be accomplished by asking several questions about
quantity and frequency of use (e.g., using the first three
questions of the AUDIT), which are easily memorized.23,24 Lack of
knowledge, rather than lack of time, is a more likely explanation
for failure to screen.
Many physicians do not screen because they believe that asking
patients about substance use is intrusive. Physicians who do not
screen are three times more likely to have this belief than
physicians who routinely screen.10 Studies suggest that patients do
not share this concern. Trials of alcohol screening in primary
care, general medical clinics, trauma centers, and emergency
departments demonstrate a high rate of patient acceptance.2-4
Some physicians are willing to detect alcohol use, but they
believe that clinical judgment is reliable and formal screening is
unnecessary.25 However, numerous studies document that physicians
generally fail to diagnose alcohol problems unless a formal
screening protocol is used. In one study, researchers screened
2,002 patients for alcohol problems, but the results were not
provided to staff. The clinical detection rate for screen-positive
patients ranged between 25% and 50%, depending on the type of
service provider.15
Similar results were found in a study of injured patients
treated in the emergency department. The staff was asked to
subjectively deter-mine if patients were intoxicated (BAC > 0.10
g/dl) or had a chronic alcohol problem. Although 45% of patients
were intoxicated, sensitivity was only 77%, and sensitivity
decreased to 63% among patients who were severely injured,
endotracheally intubated, or brain injured.26 Specificity was also
poor. More than 20% of patients who were thought to be intoxicated
had no alcohol in their blood. Patient's age, income, and insurance
status significantly influenced both sensitivity and specificity.
Patients were also screened with the CAGE and SMAST. Staff
identified fewer than 50% of screen-positive patients. Formal
screening protocols are needed because clinical judgment is
unreliable and subject to bias.15,27
A key reason that screening is not performed is the widely held
perception that treatment is not effective. In the trauma center
survey mentioned previously, only 27% of respondents believed that
"brief interventions are at least moderately effective."10 Nearly
half believed that "there are not enough treatment resources to
make screening worthwhile." An assessment of blood alcohol testing
practices found that 91% of physicians who do not measure blood
alcohol concentration believe the test is "not clinically
important" because knowledge of the patient's blood alcohol level
does not benefit the patient.28
Skepticism about treatment benefits is apparently widespread.
One study of 2,500 randomly selected emergency department
physicians found that only 55% believed that mental health
professionals (psychologists and psychiatrists) can effectively
address alcohol problems.29 Their perception of treatment efficacy
provided by other staff (physicians and surgeons) was even lower,
23%. This confirms the lack of knowledge regarding the progress in
alcohol treatment that has led to expert consensus recommendations
that all patients at risk for alcohol problems should be screened
and counseled or referred for counseling.30,31
Changing belief systems, clinical practices, and cognitive
barriers is a slow process and a formidable challenge.
Implementation will require increasing emergency department
physicians' knowledge in order to increase confidence in screening
skills and to dispel myths about the futility of treatment.
However, information alone may not change clinical practice. For
example, only 21% of survivors of myocardial infarction are treated
with beta-blockers by their primary care physician, despite the
fact that expert consensus panels consider this omission a serious
medical error.32
Studies of educational strategies to change physician behavior
suggest that informational material and formal CME conferences have
little impact, while outreach activities by professional
organizations and opinion leaders conducting on-site educational
programs produce positive change.33 However, many people become
leaders of organizations because they reflect the needs and
attitudes of members, and therefore they are not likely to
radically change the culture of the organization. The majority of
opinion leaders in emergency medicine reflect the current belief
that alcohol problems are outside their practice
domain. Unless emergency medicine staff with an interest in
integrating alcohol treatment services into emergency care assume
greater prominence and leadership in their field, effecting change
within this specialty will be slow and uneven.
Implementation will, therefore, require the emergence of leaders
who endorse the concept that alcohol screening and intervention is
their responsibility. Funding for alcohol-related research needs to
be provided to emergency department personnel on a priority basis
because such funding will lead to their professional development,
increase their national stature, lead to their advancement in
professional societies, lead to association with policymakers, and
enhance their opportunity to become opinion leaders. The
development of credible opinion leaders who are emergency medicine
clinicians, who will endorse and advance the concept of alcohol
screening and intervention, is the best means of fostering
attitudinal change within that specialty. Changes in a specialty
practice are more likely to occur if they are supported by research
conducted within that same discipline. Advances in one specialty do
not necessarily affect the practice of another. Articles published
in journals devoted to psychiatry or substance abuse will have
little impact on the practice of emergency medicine. Traditionally,
little interaction has occurred between emergency medicine
physicians and substance abuse treatment providers. Each specialty
operates within its own domain, with little integration of services
across specialities, and they do not publish in common journals.
This tendency for medical specialties to operate within their own
discipline with little cross-dissemination of information suggests
that ED staff must be involved in conducting intervention trials in
order to popularize the concept within their own field.
A MEDLINE search of papers published using the MESH terms
"alcoholism AND treatment AND intervention" yielded 47 publications
during the calendar year 2000. None of these were published in
journals devoted to emergency medicine. None of the trials of
alcohol interventions in emergency departments were published in
journals likely to be encountered by emergency care providers.2,34
It is, therefore, not surprising that emergency physicians and
staff lack knowledge about substance abuse and have failed to
embrace research advances in screening and intervention.
Current funding sources are not structured to foster the
development of leaders in emergency medicine who endorse the
concept that addressing alcohol problems is their responsibility.
Obtaining funds from study sections on emergency care is difficult
because peer-reviewers do not view alcohol-related research as
being vital. There are equally formidable obstacles when attempting
to obtain funding from alcohol study sections. Reviewers may not be
familiar with the characteristics of an emergency department as a
unique clinical community. They also prefer the use of highly
controlled diagnostic and demographic groups in order to obtain
unambiguous answers to isolate the active ingredient of treatment
efficacy. While this approach has led to great strides in
under-standing how treatment works, it may not be practical in the
real-world setting of the emergency department and may generate
studies with little external validity.
We, therefore, have a dilemma. Grant applications submitted by
emergency medicine specialists that do not use the methodologic
processes preferred by alcohol research study sections are usually
going to lose when competing against grants submitted by recognized
alcohol research specialists. On the other hand, studies conducted
by alcohol research specialists may not provide clinically relevant
intervention protocols, are not likely to be noticed or considered
credible by emergency medicine physicians, and will have little
impact on practice. There is little point in funding research on
interventions that are unlikely to be implemented.
The design and peer-review of studies on alcohol interventions
in the emergency care setting should be geared more towards
embracing the perspectives of emergency medicine specialists. Such
individuals are in the best position to understand what research
questions are important and what type of interventions are feasible
and generalizable. While their grant applications may not have the
methodologic design that study sections composed of alcohol
research specialists are accustomed to, funding such research will
lead to the development of research methodologies appropriate to
the emergency department setting.
Research conducted by emergency medicine physicians will help
establish a sense of role responsibility within the field, and this
attitude will be disseminated within the specialty by the work
product that is published and presented at practice-specific
professional meetings. This
will foster the development of a culture of acceptance of role
responsibility to screen and intervene, and develop lobbying
pressure to do so within the field of emergency medicine.
Emergency departments are frequently the only point of contact
with the health care system for indigent patients.35 Emergency
department interventions are consistent with the "No Wrong Door to
Treatment" theme of the National Treatment Plan.36 Alcohol problems
among emergency department patients consume an extraordinary amount
of health care dollars. Studies on alcohol interventions in
emergency departments should consume a proportionate amount of
research dollars.
Inadequate access to treatment/ineffective treatment
Effective, low-cost interventions that require minimal
additional staff to implement are already available. Due to
emergency department time constraints, so-called "brief
motivational interventions" are the intervention model most likely
to be successfully implemented. No other existing model is likely
to be useful in the real-world setting of the typical emergency
department.
The empirical support for brief interventions is excellent and
does not need further conceptual verification. As suggested by the
Institute of Medicine, the standards for forming a reasonable
consensus leading to a recommendation to provide brief
interventions have already been met.31 Experts already recommend
moving beyond clinical trials to national dissemination.30 There is
no need to plow new ground and perform research to develop new
interventions for emergency department use.
A 1995 meta-analysis of 32 alcohol treatment modalities found
that brief motivational counseling ranks near the top in four
categories:
1) total amount of research to investigate the modality, 2)
methodological quality of research, 3) number of studies
demonstrating improved outcomes, and 4) cost effectiveness.37
Therefore, research should not focus on foundational and
efficacy trials, but on the practical matter of successfully
adapting proven intervention techniques to the emergency department
setting. It is acknowledged that treatment must have documented
efficacy in particular populations of patients. However, the
emergency department is the entry point for medical care for a
broad spectrum of problem drinkers.
There is little reason to believe that intoxicated patients who
present to the emergency department represent a special population
to whom current research results do not apply. Patients with
alcohol problems experience an average of 1.32 injury-related
events requiring outpatient or inpatient care per year.38 Visits to
the emergency department are so common among substance-abusing
patients that it is unlikely they represent a special
treatment-resistant subgroup.
The opposite may be the case. Alcohol-related medical problems,
especially injuries, occur in the entire population of alcohol
users. Moderate, and even light drinkers, often require emergency
care because many alcohol-related events are not related to total
alcohol consumption, but rather to the activities the patient
engages in while drinking and to where, when, and with whom alcohol
is consumed. Patients with severe dependence have a
disproportionate share of alcohol-related medical consequences, but
it is estimated that such patients generate only a fraction of all
alcohol-related problems.39
Alcohol-related problems occur at lower rates, but in much
greater numbers, among patients with mild to moderate alcohol
problems because such patients constitute the greatest proportion
of the drinking population. Thus, if all patients with severe
problems stopped drinking, a substantial number of patients with
alcohol-related problems would still present to the emergency
department. For example, driving while intoxicated overlaps with
alcoholism, but it constitutes an important issue in its own right
because surveys consistently show that a substantial number of
individuals who do not meet diagnostic criteria for alcohol abuse
or dependence admit to having driven an automobile while
intoxicated. For many of these patients, brief interventions
demonstrate significant effects on subsequent alcohol intake and
emergency department resource utilization when used as stand-alone
treatment.40
Other patients may require more extended treatment. Brief
interventions may play an important role in motivating such
patients to accept a treatment referral or can be used to establish
motivation while waiting for access to publicly funded
treatment.41,42 One trial, Project Assert, provided brief
interventions and used an active referral process to gain access to
the marginal capacity of the substance abuse treatment system for
those who needed additional care.43 Its success led to its adoption
by
Boston Medical Center as a value-added service in the emergency
department. Patients without insurance may also be referred to
community resources and self-help groups. Those with insurance have
at least some access to treatment services to which they can be
referred.
Emergency department physicians may obtain the training
necessary to perform the intervention, but in most hospitals,
staffing constraints will prevent them from being the primary
providers of this service.44 Furthermore, instilling this knowledge
and sense of responsibility throughout the field will require too
broad a change in service culture for this approach to be readily
adopted. Time demands and current practice standards are likely to
limit the role of emergency department physicians to "setting the
stage" for an intervention.
Data suggest that few patients comply with a simple referral to
seek treatment after emergency department discharge.45 Therefore,
emergency departments should have dedicated staff on-site who can
provide interventions. This places the responsibility to perform
the intervention in the hands of individuals who are already
committed to providing the service and avoids dependence on
physicians who are unlikely to acquire such commitment until
significant attitudinal changes occur.
Two decades of mental health services research in primary care
settings support the concept that the most effective method of
delivering psychosocial services is through collaboration between
mental health consultants and primary care providers.46-48 A
collaborative model using emergency department physicians to screen
and mental health professionals to perform the intervention is the
approach that is most likely to be widely adopted.49
Alcohol use among emergency department patients is not likely a
problem that can be tackled by a single discipline.
Interdisciplinary research is more likely to facilitate the
development and implementation of emergency department
interventions that work in the real world. Collaborative care has
the potential to benefit both emergency department and mental
health professionals. Data suggest that substance abuse counselors
may find that a medical or surgical crisis increases patient
motivation.50 As a result, their services may be more effective
when conducted in the emergency department environment. To date,
all published studies on emergency department or trauma center
interventions have used the collaborative care
approach.2,3,34,51
Financial considerations
Despite the prevalence of alcohol use disorders, hospital
administrators are likely to raise concerns about hiring additional
staff to conduct interventions because they do not consider
addressing alcohol problems as part of their mission. Social
workers and similar individuals are available, but shifting the
burden to these individuals will still require hiring additional
employees. It will be necessary to provide evidence that hiring
staff to perform interventions is in the best interests of
stakeholders and is fiscally responsible. Therefore, studies are
needed to assess the nominal costs of implementation and any cost
offsets that occur. This has already occurred in family medicine,
which is currently the medical service with the highest screening
rate.
There is reason to believe that cost-effectiveness can be
demonstrated. For insured patients, counseling services are
billable under existing CPT (current procedural terminology) codes
when delivered by qualified staff. Studies on brief interventions
conducted in other settings demonstrate that a substantial portion
of the reduction in costs is related to a reduction in use of
emergency department and hospital resources.2-4,40
Studies of cost-effectiveness should include not only direct
medical costs, but also societal costs. Federal, state, and county
sources fund many emergency departments, particularly those in
urban areas. It is estimated that direct medical costs constitute
only 15% of total costs related to substance abuse, with the
remainder being related to problems such as property damage, crime,
absenteeism, and unemployment. Study outcomes should be
multi-dimensional and assess a broad array of outcomes because the
true stakeholders are society at large. Research that covers
multiple outcomes in addition to medical ones addresses audiences
with different needs and priorities and encourages their support
for provision of intervention services and financial resources.
Studies should, therefore, use a variety of databases, including
not only emergency department records, but also general medical
record reviews and insurance and Medicare/Medicaid claims to detect
outpatient visits. Although claims data provide the most accurate
information about health care use, ensuring adequate follow-up for
purposes of obtaining information from patient self-report is
important because many people do not report alcohol-related events
to insurance compa-nies.40 In order to interest other stakeholders,
such as policymakers and health care providers, additional
databases should be used to assess other
outcomes: for example, motor vehicle records to detect crashes;
police records to assess criminal activities; and state vital
statistics registries, the Social Security Death Index, and the
Fatal Accident Reporting System (FARS) to detect mortality.
Health care policy
Physicians have voiced a common concern about alcohol screening:
the potential denial of reimbursement for medical services provided
to patients if they have a positive blood alcohol or drug screen.
The Uniform Individual Accident and Sickness Policy Provision Law
(UPPL), a model law drafted by the National Association of
Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) in 1947, provides insurers with this
right. The NAIC is an organization of insurance regulators from the
50 states, the District of Columbia, and the 4 U.S. territories. It
provides a forum for the development of uniform policy and
addresses the need to coordinate regulation of multi-state
insurers.
The model law states, "The insurer shall not be liable for any
loss sustained or contracted in consequence of the insured's being
intoxicated or under the influence of any narcotic unless
administered on the advice of a physician." Thirty-eight states
adopted the law, and four others have adopted it with provisional
restrictions that apply only to narcotics, or to injuries sustained
while committing a felony. However, it is obvious that if screening
is not performed, the provision cannot be applied. Physicians are
unlikely to screen if it affects their legitimate expectation for
financial remuneration for patient care. The main effect of this
law has not been to decrease insurance claims, but to discourage
physicians from screening for alcohol problems.52
In practice, the UPPL applies to only a fraction of patients
treated in the emergency department. Many patients are uninsured or
carry policies that do not enforce this provision. However,
emergency physicians do not engage in analysis of insurance
contracts before providing care and are therefore unaware of the
type of coverage, if any, carried by the patient. As a result, fear
of financial loss generally prompts physicians to treat all
patients as if the UPPL applies to them.
The NAIC recently adopted an amendment to the UPPL which states
(1) "This provision may not be used with respect to a medical
expense policy" and (2) "For purposes of this provision, 'medical
expense policy' means an accident and sickness insurance policy
that provides hospital,
medical and surgical expense coverage." The National Conference
of Insurance Legislators (NCOIL), an organization of state
legislators whose main area of public policy concern is insurance
legislation and regulation, recently passed a resolution asking
states to repeal the UPPL.
The primary instruments of public policy for NCOIL and the NAIC
are model laws and guidelines. Model legislation forms a uniform
basis from which all states can deal with regulatory issues. The
basic legislative structure of insurance regulation requires some
degree of uniformity throughout the states. However, states are
free to maintain their own insurance codes. They may either adopt
the models intact, modify them to meet their specific needs, or
ignore them. Emergency physicians should provide their legislative
representatives and insurance regulators with information about how
the UPPL adversely affects their ability to implement alcohol
intervention programs and encourage them to implement the changes
recommended by the NAIC and NCOIL.
A serious concern expressed by physicians is that documenting
alcohol use in the medical record has the potential to abridge
patient confidentiality about sensitive issues.53 Patients with
substance abuse disorders may face stigmatization and other
potentially serious consequences if screening results are not
protected. Fear of stigmatization gave rise to federal regulations
and laws protecting information related to substance abuse. The
intent of these regulations is to encourage individuals to seek
treatment for substance abuse by reducing the risk that they will
be stigmatized. The laws are contained in the Code of Federal
Regulations (42 C.F.R. Part 2), Confidentiality of Alcohol and Drug
Abuse Patient Records.
The regulations apply to hospitals that have either an
identified unit that provides substance abuse treatment or medical
personnel whose primary function is the provision of alcohol and
other drug abuse diagnosis, treatment, or referral for treatment
(C.F.R. Part 2 2.11). The law specifically states that records
generated by emergency and trauma physicians are not covered
because their primary function is not to provide substance abuse
counseling. Presumably, this would not harm the congressional
intent of attracting people to treatment because patients do not
come to the emergency department with the intention of receiving
substance abuse treatment.
If an emergency department hires staff whose primary function is
screening and intervention, the application of this law will need
to be
reconsidered by emergency physicians and hospitals. If a blood
alcohol level is obtained to facilitate treatment of an illness or
injury, it is not under special protection. However, if it is
obtained in order to engage the patient in treatment, the
information is protected under the above federal regulations that
require the express, written permission of the patient before it
can be shared with others.54 A special "Consent for the Release of
Confidential Information" form must be signed in order for this
information to be released.55 Under federal regulations, a general
medical consent form is not sufficient.
Recommendations
1. Emergency medicine physicians should increase their
knowledge, skills, and confidence in alcohol screening and
intervention. To accomplish this and change current practice
patterns, studies on alcohol interventions should be framed,
focused, and performed by emergency medicine physicians.
2. Given the magnitude of alcohol problems and the ability of
emergency departments to identify patients who might not otherwise
seek treatment, funding agencies should give high priority to
research on alcohol problems in EDs.
3. Research support should be primarily for services research,
not the development of new intervention models or prototypes.
Translational studies that develop methods of adapting already
validated interventions into emergency department practice are
needed. Data obtained from practically oriented translational
studies will help to develop guidelines for optimal resource
allocation by determining the sub-population of patients for whom
brief interventions are most effective. They will also provide a
framework for future investigations that target non-responsive
patients in need of more extensive services. Studies should be
conducted using a collaborative process that involves mental health
specialists and other appropriate professionals.
4. Research is needed on referral strategies for more severely
impaired, non-responsive patients, to assist them in gaining access
to resources already available in their communities. This research
should include studies on the use of no-cost services such as
self-help or 12-step
programs using, for example, abbreviated forms of the "Twelve
Step Facilitation Therapy Manual" developed for use in Project
MATCH.56 The 12-step arm of Project Match had the best outcomes in
the study, regardless of "matching" considerations.
5. Research studies of cost-effectiveness are needed to
convince physicians and administrators that having staff available
to address alcohol problems is an integral component of the
practice of medicine and part of their mission. Since cost-benefit
analysis is critical to over-coming resistance to implementation,
research groups should include health care economists or health
services researchers.
6. Emergency and trauma physicians, their respective
professional organizations, and alcohol advocacy groups should
contact their state insurance regulator, state department of health
and human services, and legislators involved in insurance issues to
urge amending state insurance codes that financially penalize
hospitals and physicians who screen for alcohol.
7. Emergency departments should designate specific individuals
to assume the role of obtaining and interpreting screening results
and to provide interventions. This is the most immediately
available policy to protect patients with federal confidentiality
regulations and alleviate legitimate concerns about the right to
privacy.
References
1. Loneck B, Garrett JA, Banks SM. A comparison of the Johnson
Intervention with four other methods of referral to outpatient
treatment. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse 1996;22:233-46.
2. Monti PM, Colby SM, Barnett NP, et al. Brief intervention
for harm reduction with alcohol-positive older adolescents in a
hospital emergency department. J Consult Clin Psychol
1999;67:989-94.
3. Gentilello LM, Rivara FP, Donovan, DM, et al. Alcohol
interventions in a trauma center as a means of reducing the risk of
injury recurrence. Ann Surg 1999;230:473-83.
4. Fleming MF, Barry KL, Manwill LB, et al. Brief physician
advice for problem drinkers: a randomized controlled trial in
community based primary care practices. JAMA 1997;277:1039-45.
5. World Health Organization Brief Intervention Study Group. A
cross national trial of brief interventions with heavy drinkers. Am
J Public Health 1996;86: 948-55.
6. Bien TH, Miller WR, Tonigan JS. Brief interventions for
alcohol problems: a review. Addiction 1993;88:315-35.
7. Wilk AI, Jensen NM, Havighurst TC. Meta-analysis of
randomized control trials addressing brief interventions in heavy
alcohol drinkers. J Gen Intern Med 1997;12:274-83.
8. Dunn CW, Ries R. Linking substance abuse services with
general medical care: integrated brief interventions with
hospitalized patients. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse 1997;23:1-13.
9. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Healthy People
2010: Hospital and Emergency Department Referrals. Washington (DC):
U.S. Government Printing Office; 2000.
10. Danielson PE, Rivara FP, Gentilello LM, et al. Reasons why
trauma surgeons fail to screen for alcohol problems. Arch Surg
1999;134:564-8.
11. Mattson ME, Donovan DM. Clinical applications: the
transition from research into practice. J Stud Alcohol 1994 (12
Suppl):163-6.
12. Huey ED. Finer points about new treatment approaches.
Alcohol Health Res World 1989;15:219-20.
13. Geller G, Levine DM, Mamon, et al. Knowledge, attitudes,
and reported practices of medical students and house staff
regarding the diagnosis and treatment of alcoholism. JAMA
1989;261:3115-20.
14. Lewis DC. The role of internal medicine in addiction
medicine. J Addict Dis 1996;15:1-7.
15. Moore RD, Bone LR, Geller G, et al. Prevalence, detection
and treatment of alcoholism in hospitalized patients. JAMA
1989;261:403-7.
16. Gerbert B, Maguire BT, Bleecker T, et al. Primary care
physicians and AIDS: attitudinal and structural barriers to care.
JAMA 1991;266:2837-42.
17. Peters J, Brooker C, McCabe C, et al. Problems encountered
with opportunistic screening for alcohol-related problems in
patients attending an accident and emergency department. Addiction
1998;93:589-94.
18. D'Onofrio G. Screening and brief intervention for alcohol
problems: what will it take? Acad Emerg Med 2000;7:69-71.
19. Ewing JA. Detecting alcoholism: the CAGE questionnaire.
JAMA 1984: 252;1905-7.
20. Selzer ML. The Michigan Alcoholism Screening Test: the
quest for a new diagnostic instrument. Am J Psychiatry
1971;127:1653-8.
21. Krishel S, Richards CF. Alcohol and substance abuse
training for emergency medicine residents: a survey of US programs.
Acad Emerg Med 1999;6:964-6.
22. Isaacson JH, Fleming M, Kraus M, et al. A national survey
of training in substance use disorders in residency programs. J
Stud Alcohol 2000;61:912-5.
23. Saunders JB, Aasland OF, Babor TF, et al. Development of
the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT). Addiction
1993;88:791-804.
24. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. The
Physician's Guide to Helping Patients with Alcohol Problems.
Washington (DC): Government Printing Office; 1995. NIH Publication
No. 95-3769.
25. Livingston DH, Lavery RF, Passannante MR, et al. Admission
or observation is not necessary after a negative abdominal computed
tomographic scan in patients with suspected blunt abbdominal
trauma: results of a prospective, multi-institutional trial. J
Trauma 1998;44:273-80.
26. Gentilello LM, Villaveces A, Ries RR, et al. Detection of
acute alcohol intoxication and chronic alcohol dependence by trauma
center staff. J Trauma 1999; 47:1131-9.
27. Grossman DC, Mueller BA, Kenaston T, et al. The validitiy
of police assessment of driver intoxication in motor vehicle
crashes leading to hospitalization. Accid Anal Prev
1996;28:435-42.
28. Soderstrom CA, Dailey JT, Kerns TJ. Alcohol and other
drugs: an assessment of testing and clinical practices in US Trauma
Centers. J Trauma 1994;36:68-73.
29. Chang G, Astrachan B, Weil U, et al. Reporting
alcohol-impaired drivers: results from a national survey of
emergency physicians. Ann Emerg Med 1992; 21:284-90.
30. Babor TF, Higgens-Biddle JC. Alcohol screening and brief
intervention: dissemination strategies for medical practice and
public health. Addiction 2000; 95:677-86.
31. Institute of Medicine. Broadening the Base of Treatment for
Alcohol Problems. Washington (DC): National Academy Press;
1990.
32. Chassin MR, Galvin RW. The urgent need to improve health
care quality. Institute of Medicine National Roundtable on Health
Care Quality. JAMA 1998; 280(11):1000-5
33. Davis DA, Thomson MA, Oxman AD, et al. Changing physician
performance. A systematic review of the effect of continuing
medical education strategies. JAMA 1995;274(9):700-5.
34. Longabaugh R, Woolard RF, Nirenberg TD, et al. Evaluating
the effects of a brief motivational intervention for injured
drinkers in the emergency department. J Stud Alcohol
2001;62(6):806-16.
35. Horgan C, editor. Substance Abuse: The nation's number one
public health problem. Key indicators for policy. Princeton (NJ):
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation; 1993.
36. Center for Substance Abuse Treatment, Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration. Changing the Conversation.
Improving Substance Abuse Treatment: The National Treatment Plan
Initiative. Washington (DC): U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services; 2000.
37. Hester RK, Miller WR. Handbook of Alcoholism Treatment
Approaches: Effective Alternatives. Boston: Allyn & Bacon;
1995.
38. Blose JO, Holder HD. Injury-related medical care
utilization in a problem drinking population. Am J Public Health
1991;81:1571-5.
39. Gerstein DR, editor. Toward the Prevention of Alcohol
Problems: Government, business, and community action. Washington
(DC): National Academy Press; 1984.
40. Fleming MF, Mundt MP, French MT, et al. Benefit-cost
analysis of brief physician advice with problem drinkers in primary
care settings. Med Care 2000;38:7-18.
41. Dunn CW, Ries R. Linking substance abuse services with
general medical care: integrated brief interventions with
hospitalized patients. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse 1997;23:1-13.
42. Miller RW, Meyers RJ, Tonigan JS. Engaging the unmotivated
in treatment for alcohol problems: a comparison of three strategies
for intervention through family members. J Consult Clin Psychol
1999;67:688-97.
43. Bernstein E, Bernstein J, Levenson S. Project ASSERT: an
ED-based intervention to increase acess to primary care, preventive
sercvices and the substance abuse treatment system. Ann Emerg Med
1997;30:181-9.
44. D'Onofrio G, Bernstein E, Bernstein J, Woolard RH, Brewer
PA, Craig SA, Zink BJ. Patients with alcohol problems in the
emergency department, part 2: intervention and referral. SAEM
Substance Abuse Task Force. Society for Academic Emergency
Medicine. Acad Emerg Med 1998;5(12):1210-7.
45. Peters J, Brooker C, McCabe C, et al. Problems encountered
with opportunistic screening for alcohol-related problems in
patients attending an accident and emergency department. Addiction
1998;93:589-94.
46. Mueser KT, Drake RE, Noordsy DL. Integrated mental health
and substance abuse treatment for severe psychiatric disorders.
Journal of Practical Psychology and Behavioral Health
1998;4:129-39.
47. Katon W, Vor Korff M, Line E, et al. Population-based care
of depression: effective disease management strategies to decrease
prevalence. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 1997;19:169-78.
48. Von Korff M, Gruman J, Schaefer J, et al. Essential
elements for collaborative management of chronic illness. Ann
Intern Med 1997;127:1097-1102.
49. Gentilello LM, Donovan DM, Dunn CW, and Rivara FP. Alcohol
Interventions in trauma centers: current practice and future
directions. JAMA 1995; 274(13):1043-8.
50. Schmaling KB, Blume AW. Brief Report. Loss and readiness to
change substance abuse. Addict Behav 1996;21:527-30.
51. New York State Office of Alcoholism and Substance Abuse
Services. Summary of the Principal Findings: The health care
intervention service program evaluation. Princeton (NJ): Robert
Wood Johnson Foundation. Supported by grant #18999 from the Robert
Wood Johnson Foundation.
52. Rivara FP, Tollefson S, Tesh E, Gentilello LM. Screening
trauma patients for alcohol problems: are insurance companies
barriers? J Trauma 2000;48(1):115-8.
53. Rostenberg PO, editor. Alcohol and Other Drug Screening of
Hospitalized Trauma Patients. Treatment Improvement Protocol (TIP)
Series 16. Rockville (MD): Center for Substance Abuse Treatment,
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration; 1995.
HHS Publication No. (SMA) 95-3039.
54. Confidentiality of Alcohol and Drug Abuse Patient Records,
42 C.F.R. Part 2 (2001).
55. Form of written consent, 42 C.F.R. sect. 2.31 (2001).
56. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. Twelve
Step Facilitation Therapy Manual. A clinical research guide for
therapists treating individuals with alcohol abuse and dependence.
Project MATCH monograph series. Rockville (MD): National Institute
on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism; 1995. NIH Publication No.
94-3722.


Response to Dr. Larry Gentilello's Presentation
Stephen M. Hargarten, MD, MPH
I am honored to have the opportunity to participate in this
timely conference. It is my belief that our deliberations and
discussion should greatly assist the articulation of a focused,
thoughtful research agenda for addressing alcohol-related problems
in the emergency department (ED) setting.
My comments are intended to link this research agenda with the
unique, strategic position of the emergency department and to
reflect on the new partnership of the federal agencies and care
providers represented here today. I think this effort reflects the
philosophy of emergency medicine, which seeks out collaborators,
partners, and advisors for all of the problems that may arise in
the ED.
I feel strongly that the ED-based research agenda should address
the spectrum of problems that present daily to the ED. Screening
and interventions for alcohol-related problems must be integrated
into the practice of emergency medicine and all of the emergency
department's clinical activities. The research agenda's translation
to practice should reflect the spectrum of alcohol use and related
problems as well, given that the ED is inundated with patients who
have alcohol-related problems. A series of carefully structured,
single questions needs to be developed that can identify at-risk
users, alcohol abusers, and alcoholics. When I first began
practicing, the extent of screening consisted of the question, "Are
you a drinking man?"
Exciting research now is pinpointing which intervention (really
brief, brief, short-term, long-term) is most effective as well as
where it is most effectively delivered (emergency department,
hospital, and/or treatment center). While all of the answers are
not yet known, the progress is encouraging.
It is evident that additional research is needed to 1) refine
the set of single questions that improve efficacy and efficiency;
2) identify high-risk groups, essential to focused, effective
screening; and 3) match the alcohol-related problem to the
intervention.
This is the essence of the traditional biomedical research
model. I look forward to the day when the next Joint Commission
hospital visit includes the requirement to demonstrate our ED and
hospital-based
screening and intervention "toolbox" that addresses this patient
population with alcohol problems.
Health care settings should be considered safe, effective,
patient-centered, timely, efficient places of equitable care. These
descriptors of health care quality from the recent Institute of
Medicine report1 should be applied to all patients with
alcohol-related problems.
I think Dr. Gentilello's presentation nicely outlined the
elements of the biomedical model and approach. Dr. Gentilello has
made a significant contribution to the insurance industry's
policies toward alcohol-related problems. Many trauma surgeons and
emergency physicians oppose alcohol screening in the current
environment because of concerns about non-payment for services. I
appreciate the advances being made to integrate screening into
emergency departments, and I agree with Dr. Gentilello's assessment
of the barriers to making screening a reality. Physicians' and
other providers' knowledge, skills, and attitudes can all create
barriers.
At this point, I want to depart from the biomedical research
model to discuss the importance of an epidemiologic shift towards
population health. I feel that the research agenda should also
integrate the public health model. The ED is in a strategic
position to inform the public and policymakers about the scope and
nature of alcohol-related problems in the ED. An epidemiologic
shift from screening to surveillance, from individual patients
inside the ED to populations of patients outside the ED, will serve
to understand at-risk behaviors of groups of patients, the
agent/vehicle of morbidity and mortality, alcohol, and the
environment in which these groups interface with alcohol.
Policy-relevant studies are needed to address the marketing,
distribution, and sale of alcohol to high-risk groups and
environments. Research that examines pricing schemes and marketing
strategies that are associated with college-based binge drinking is
needed. A set of single policy-relevant questions should be
routinely asked such as, "Where did you buy the alcohol?" and
"Where were you drinking before you were injured?" Linking the
abuse/individual behavior questions to when and where the alcohol
was consumed has important implications. Research that evaluates
policy interventions linked with reliable, accurate surveil-lance
information can influence policy changes such as lowering the legal
limit of a driver's BAC or extending DWI laws to cover snowmobile
driving.
Research on changing social norms for alcohol use and abuse is
needed for practitioners and patients, given that alcohol-related
problems are still largely viewed as a social issue, not a medical
problem. Addressing emergency medicine training will be very
challenging since emergency medicine professionals might have their
own social norms of at risk alcohol usage that will influence their
effectiveness and interest.
The emergency department-based research agenda need not be
limited to the biomedical model. It should be extended to include
health services research and access to matched, therapeutic
interventions. It should also use the public health model
(addressing behavior, the agent/ vehicle, and the environment), and
the injury control model (prevention, acute care, and
rehabilitation). By using different models, the research agenda can
address treatment and policy issues and develop and evaluate
prevention strategies at the primary, secondary, and tertiary
levels. Ultimately, this multiple approach will help us to reach
our shared goal of fewer alcohol-related deaths and injuries.
Reference
1. Committee on Quality of Health Care, Institute of Medicine.
Crossing the Quality Chasm: A new health system for the 21st
century. Washington (DC): National Academy Press; 2001.


Comments on Implementing Preventive Interventions in Emergency
Medicine: Strategic Considerations
Linda C. Degutis, DrPH
Dr. Gentilello has raised many important issues in his paper.
Many of them point to the lack of knowledge of the evidence that
screening and intervention for and treatment of alcohol problems
can be effective in decreasing morbidity and mortality. This is
certainly an area where we can be proactive in highlighting the
evidence that these strategies work, and for those who are
practitioners, in modeling behaviors that include screening,
intervention, and referral for patients who have alcohol-related
problems.
Other areas also need to be addressed, and some definitions need
to be clarified. For example, Dr. Gentilello performed a MEDLINE
review using the term "alcoholism." While this term may refer to
the patients who are dependent on alcohol, it does not necessarily
capture at-risk drinking or hazardous drinking patterns. It will
not capture the patient who drinks six or eight drinks a few times
a month, drives a motor vehicle, and is injured in a crash. Using
the term "alcohol" and searching the indexes of two of the primary
emergency medicine journals, Annals of Emergency Medicine and
Academic Emergency Medicine, 121 citations were selected for the
years 1990-2000. Of these, 61 were original articles that either
had "alcohol" in the title or were clearly examining
alcohol-related problems. There was also a trend toward an
increasing number of articles published in the later years. Only
one article appeared in 1990, while nine were published in 2000.
Several other articles published in 2000 discussed alcohol as a
risk factor for particular injuries or disease. In 1998, Academic
Emergency Medicine, which is published by the Society for Academic
Emergency Medicine, published two papers that included
recommendations for screening and intervention for alcohol problems
in the emergency department.1,2 So, it does not seem that editorial
boards are not accepting articles about alcohol problems. Perhaps
the issue is that the number of researchers in this area is small,
and therefore few papers are submitted.
Dr. Gentilello makes several recommendations in his paper. He
states that the studies need to be framed, focused, and performed
by emergency medicine physicians using a collaborative process. It
is necessary that emergency physicians perform research in this
area, but the contribution of other researchers should not be
negated, nor should other researchers be discouraged from working
in this area. What is important is that a team approach be taken to
build upon the strengths of alcohol research methodologists,
epidemiologists, economists, social workers, nurses, and others who
have specific contributions to make.
Focusing research support on health services researchers is
important, but the opportunities to develop new methods of
intervention should not be eliminated. Translational studies will
help in the adaptation of interventions in emergency medicine
practice, but interventions evolve over time, and new methods are
developed and tested. Emergency medicine should participate in this
research. Researching strategies for engaging emergency department
patients in treatment, especially those with high recidivism rates,
would be of tremendous benefit to the field of emergency medicine.
Examining cost-effectiveness is also important, as practitioners
are constantly asked to do more with less, and patients face the
threat of cuts in essential services in order to trim budgets.
With respect to policy, Dr. Gentilello deserves a great deal of
credit for the work that he has done with the National Association
of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) and the National Conference of
Insurance Legislators (NCOIL). He has been very effective in
convincing them that it is necessary to change their policies so
that practitioners would not fear that screening for alcohol
problems could place their patients in jeopardy of losing insurance
coverage. Other policy questions need to be answered as well. Would
reimbursement for screening and brief intervention increase
screening and intervention, and subsequently, decrease morbidity
and mortality? To what extent do emergency department patients have
coverage for alcohol and other drug problems, and how does this
affect their ability to enter treatment when they are referred?
Have state substance abuse parity laws decreased the number of
people who need to seek treatment through the ED rather than other
facilities? What degree of confidentiality can be assured with
respect to records of alcohol screening and intervention in the ED,
and how does this affect screening and intervention rates?
As we already know, this is a complex problem that probably does
not have simple solutions. I think that some clarifications are
necessary to ensure we are using common language and common
definitions. In the field of injury epidemiology and injury
control, we try to avoid the use of the term "accidents" and
instead use terms such as "injury events." When describing patients
who have manifested problems with alcohol, we should use
definitions such as "at-risk drinking," "abuse," and "dependence"
to define the continuum of alcohol problems that we see. We also
need to be clear about the disease processes that we are interested
in studying. To many health care practitioners, the term "trauma"
means something very different than the term "injury." "Trauma"
often connotes injuries of significant severity to require
treatment by specialized care providers, whereas "injury" often is
perceived as meaning relatively minor physical injury. The term
"injury" is more inclusive and should be used, as "trauma" is a
subset of injury. If we cannot converse with and understand one
another, there is little hope that we can effectively deliver our
message outside of our field.
There are additional complexities to doing research in the
emergency department setting, created by the physical environment,
the practice environment, the ever-increasing demand for emergency
care as evidenced by increases in ED visits, and the financial
constraints that affect the type of real-world interventions that
can be implemented and evaluated. In addition, we often have
difficulties with Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals, as
alcohol problems are still viewed as sensitive issues, and some
IRBs are uncomfortable approving this type of research.
The field of emergency medicine is young and evolving and
developing its evidence base for clinical practice. This is leading
to much debate among emergency physicians about their role in
providing preventive services. The Society for Academic Emergency
Medicine is addressing these issues through its Public Health Task
Force, as well as through sessions at its annual meeting and
articles in Academic Emergency Medicine. Research in this area is
in its very early stages.
Because the field of emergency medicine is young, large numbers
of established researchers do not exist. To increase research
capacity, we need to teach people how to do the research through
fellowships, faculty development programs and grants, mentored
research awards, and other programs that foster the development of
new researchers.
Translational research, as well as the communication of findings
to the community and evaluation of implementation, is another
challenge. Funding for translational research has been inadequate,
as has a focus on sustainability of interventions that are
implemented, once an evaluation has ended. Along with encouraging
the implementation of effective interventions in the ED setting, it
is also necessary to develop strategies to ensure sustainability of
those interventions.
One area of research that has not received much attention in our
discussions over the past two days is that of policy research. This
type of research tends to focus on population impact, rather than
on impact on the individual patient or practitioner. Often,
policies are created and implemented with no study of their
effectiveness or the unintended consequences that arise from their
implementation. Dr. Gentilello has highlighted one specific policy
area, but there are many other policy directions that must be
evaluated. These policies may be public or private and may be
implemented on the institutional, local, state, or national level.
For example, in Connecticut, we recently lost funding for
transporting patients to substance abuse treatment services. It is
not hard to imagine the impact of this, but it was only in
examining the cost to referring institutions that a movement to
reinstate the funding began. Now our task is to identify more
cost-effective ways of providing the needed services before funding
is cut yet again.
We are currently involved in the evaluating Connecticut Public
Act 98-201, which has several provisions.3 The primary goal of this
legislation is to implement universal screening for alcohol and
other drug problems among injured patients admitted to acute care
hospitals. Other provisions include development of model continuing
education standards for health professionals and plans for
including training about alcohol and other drug problems in the
standard curricula for health professionals attending institutions
of higher learning. The original law signed by the governor
required screening of all injured patients admitted to an acute
care hospital as well as injured patients who required the
activation of a trauma team response or who were transferred to or
from an acute care institution. Many emergency physicians in the
state interpreted the law to mean that they would have to perform
screening of injured patients presenting to the emergency
department. They vehemently objected to this policy and were able
to have the legislature include a technical correction that
clarified that screening is required
among injured patients who are admitted to acute care hospitals
as inpatients, rather than implying that all injured patients
presenting to the ED be screened. Given this reaction by
physicians, are we ready to ask for broader implementation of these
policies?
The lack of acceptance of screening as a routine part of
practice is only one of the barriers that we face. Policies have
been developed on the basis of evidence that treatment for
addiction is effective. Several states have passed substance abuse
treatment parity legislation that requires insurers to cover
treatment for alcohol and other drug (AOD) problems to the same
extent that they cover treatment for other diseases. There is no
federal legislation to this effect so the result is that in states
that have parity laws, many people are still not guaranteed
comparable coverage for AOD treatment because their insurance plans
are governed by federal law under the Employee's Retirement Income
Security Act (ERISA). In addition, some insurance plans do not
offer any coverage for AOD problems so the parity statutes do not
apply to them. Of course, people who lack health insurance have
even more limited access to treatment.
Many people who are under the jurisdiction of the criminal
justice system have AOD problems. In addition, evidence exists that
treatment of these problems leads to a decrease in crime. But,
little has been done to ensure that people involved in this system
receive necessary treatment for their disease. Instead, there is
often a tendency to criminalize addiction and to "treat" the
problem through arrests and prison terms. Some states, such as
Connecticut, require that anyone who is incapacitated by alcohol be
transported to an acute care facility rather than jail. The intent
of this law was to bring people into the treatment system and to
avoid the consequences of unrecognized severe problems with
alcohol. Currently, emergency departments in Connecticut see many
patients with acute alcohol intoxication on a daily basis, but
funds for treatment are limited.
The education of practitioners in the process of screening and
brief intervention is another area that needs study. To promulgate
a standardized approach to patients with cardiac problems, the
Advanced Cardiac Life Support course was developed. Similarly, the
Advanced Trauma Life Support course provides a standardized
approach to the initial care of the injured patient. Both of these
courses, as well as others such as Advanced Pediatric Life Support
and Prehospital Trauma Life Support
combine didactic sessions with skill-building sessions to
improve practitioner knowledge and skills in these areas. Perhaps
we need to develop a similar approach for screening and
intervention-an Advanced Alcohol Problem Identification and
Intervention course.
Despite the evidence of the relationship between alcohol and
injury, we still do not have strong support for screening and
intervention from our colleagues who deliver trauma care. In the
most recent version of the American College of Surgeons monograph
Optimal Care of the Injured Patient, which describes standards of
care for verification of trauma centers, the requirement that
trauma centers be able to perform blood alcohol testing was
eliminated.4 The message this sends may be interpreted in several
ways: a) there is not a sufficient relationship between alcohol and
injury to justify testing for alcohol use in injured patients;
b) issues of alcohol use among injured patients are not in the
purview of the trauma team; c) nothing can be done to address the
issue of alcohol problems among injured patients so testing does
not help; or d) not testing protects the patient and the
practitioner from various legal issues.
Dr. Gentilello recommends the development of an ED alcohol
research center. While his idea of highlighting this area of
research holds great merit, operationalization is problematic. If
there is an ED alcohol research center, will there also be a
primary care alcohol research center, a trauma alcohol research
center, and a critical care alcohol research center? His proposal,
rather than bringing the field together, can lead to fragmentation
within the small group of researchers who are doing work in this
area.
The importance of developing partnerships with public health
researchers and practitioners, alcohol researchers, community-based
organizations, and others has been discussed. It is important that
we look at the impact of interventions not only in the academic
environment that is populated by students, residents, and faculty,
but also in community practice and rural settings. We need to
explore the impact of interventions in settings such as the Indian
Health Service that serve distinct populations.
Finally, I would like to address the issue of funding. Much of
the research that is being done in this area is not supported by
the National Institutes of Health, but by other federal agencies
such as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the
National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration, and the Health Resources and Services
Administration. We need to consider the impact of the funding
policies of these agencies both in promoting research and in
growing the field of alcohol research in emergency medicine. The
smaller agencies often include indirect costs as well as direct
costs within the budget cap for a particular project. While this
may not be problematic in an institution with an indirect rate of
25%, it is very difficult for a researcher at an institution with
an indirect rate of 60% or higher to compete, as much of the budget
is taken up by indirect costs. In addition, this type of funding
policy discourages the research community from collaborating with
academic centers because the researchers perceive that the bulk of
the budget is going to some administrative group with whom they
have no interaction and who has no interest in what the researchers
are doing.
In summary, alcohol problems are a significant issue for
emergency department patients. A growing body of evidence
demonstrates that interventions in the emergency department are
effective and that treatment referral can work. The opportunities
for research in this area are great, and we need to work to develop
research capacity. There is a need for interdisciplinary teams of
researchers who can draw on one another's knowledge and strengths.
Although funding strategies can be improved, funding is available
for this work. We have already come a long way, and much is left to
do.
References
1. D'Onofrio G, Bernstein E, Bernstein J, Woolard RH, Brewer
PA, Craig SA, Zink BJ. Patients with alcohol problems in the
emergency department, part 2: intervention and referral. SAEM
Substance Abuse Task Force. Society for Academic Emergency
Medicine. Acad Emerg Med 1998;5(12):1210-7.
2. D'Onofrio G, Bernstein E, Bernstein J, Woolard RH, Brewer
PA, Craig SA, Zink BJ. Patients with alcohol problems in the
emergency department, part 1: improving detection. SAEM Substance
Abuse Task Force. Society for Academic Emergency Medicine. Acad
Emerg Med 1998;5(12):1200-9.
3. An Act Concerning Substance Abuse Emergency Room Screening
and Training and Education for Health Care Professionals, 1998.
Connecticut General Statutes, P.A. 98-201.
4. Committee on Trauma, American College of Surgeons. Optimal
Care of the Injured Patient: 1999. Chicago (IL): American College
of Surgeons; 1998.


General Discussion
Jeffrey Runge agreed with Larry Gentilello that health
economists should be part of the research team. He noted that we
must demonstrate the value of interventions to hospital
administrators if we want extra staff for interventions. He also
echoed Gentilello's comment about the need to individualize
interventions. In his multi-center study, interventionists felt
restricted by a standard intervention, sensing that variation was
needed to meet different clients' needs.
Gentilello said that research methodologists want interventions
to be standardized so that they know why a treatment is working.
However, if they cannot use those interventions in their clinical
setting, the interventions are of no use.
Elinor Walker commented that something about an intervention
must be standardized in order to assess its cost-effectiveness.
Gentilello suggested that the salaries of full-time employees
could provide cost data and blood alcohol tests and admission rates
could provide effectiveness data.
Linda Degutis added that interventions have to be monitored. If
a standardized intervention is not used, audio tapes can at least
give an idea of how it works.
Carl Soderstrom agreed with Gentilello that alcohol-related
research must be published not in substance abuse journals, but in
publications read by emergency and trauma surgery staff. For
example, he noted that the American College of Surgeons' Resources
for Optimal Care of the Injured Patient: 1999, which contains
guidelines for the certification of trauma centers, omitted the
requirement to test patients' blood alcohol content for the first
time in 20 years. He admitted that many times a positive blood
alcohol test in patients with head injuries can be trouble-some.
However, when he explored the reasons for the omission, he found
that the group that wrote the latest version of the American
College of Surgeons resource guide did not have access to data that
proved that treatment had any value. Regarding the issue of
non-payment for services provided to alcohol-impaired patients, he
observed
that insurance companies rarely take advantage of their current
legal right to deny payment due to alcohol use.
Stephen Hargarten said that screening for alcohol applies not
only to the potential for interventions, but also to the patient's
overall quality of care, including safety from injury due to
alcohol impairment or from alcohol withdrawal during the acute
phase of treatment for medical or surgical conditions.
Gentilello observed that his publications in trauma journals
have earned him a great deal of attention and have raised
awareness. He said that changes in emergency medicine practice will
require publication of studies in journals that reach emergency
medicine practitioners.
Phillip Brewer noted that at annual meetings of the Society for
Academic Emergency Medicine (SAEM), papers dealing with substance
abuse were spread over other categories such as geriatrics and
injury. One of the goals of the Substance Abuse Interest Group of
SAEM was to authorize a substance abuse category for abstracts and
sessions at the annual meeting. To date, SAEM has not agreed to a
separate category. The idea of prevention in emergency medicine has
taken root for injury and domestic violence, he said, but not yet
for substance abuse.
Peter Rostenberg agreed that forsaking the BAC prevents good
management and good medicine. At his hospital, attending physicians
are responsible for dealing with the results of alcohol screens and
they receive a letter when they fail to do so. He observed that
this system had been effective largely because physicians had seen
patients recover.
Richard Longabaugh urged that collaborative studies include
health services researchers. He noted that there is an R-01
interactive project that allows for great collaboration across
disciplines. He also encouraged researchers to continue publishing
in journals about their own areas of expertise. Although he, too,
had concerns about standardized manuals, he noted that studies show
that such manuals do not result in poorer treatments. He suggested
the use of decision trees in the manuals, which can lend more
flexibility to clinical applications of research. Depending on the
patient and the setting, paths can be traveled very quickly and
adapted quickly as well.
Gentilello agreed that we should all keep publishing in our
various disciplines. However, he reiterated that if we do not
publish in trauma and emergency medicine journals, practices will
not change. He said it is easier to change a field from within than
from the outside. He also emphasized the importance of funding
emergency medicine specialists, not just alcohol researchers, to
conduct this research.
Richard Brown observed that although the grant review process at
NIH can be difficult, the experience of re-submitting grants has
strengthened his work. The process can be a learning opportunity
and result in more sound research. He speculated that if many
dependent patients can have spontaneous remissions, then research
on whether brief interventions could help them seems warranted.
However, he thought that guidelines to require screening in
emergency departments were premature, particularly without funding
to support required changes. Instead, he advocated implementing
demonstration projects that use different models. Consistent
evaluation across the models would determine if they actually make
a difference. He thought that without this type of research,
requirements would cause a rebellion against practice changes.
Hargarten noted that it has not been long since the Joint
Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO)
mandated policies and procedures to enhance domestic violence
screening and intervention in every ED in the country. He thinks
screening for alcohol problems in EDs is on the horizon. In order
to get reasonable requirements and uniform adherence in the 5,000
EDs in the country, it will be necessary for an external body like
JCAHO to be thinking about this now. In the meantime, we need to be
doing research that will make sure that appropriate requirements
are adopted. With respect to the methodological issues, we must
balance rigorous follow-through and long-term studies with studies
that are germane to emergency departments. Collaboration with
rigorous methodologists is important, but those collaborations have
to focus on what can be accomplished specifically in the ED
setting.
Gentilello clarified that he had not criticized the peer-review
process, but that panels reviewing alcohol interventions in EDs
should include representatives of emergency medicine. Grant review
panels should consider proposals from the perspective of the
emergency physician, not the perspective of the psychiatrist, who
probably has not been in
an ED for many years. Since alcohol interventions in the ED cut
across different disciplines, the peer-review group should embrace
multiple perspectives. Methodologies that work in the emergency
department come from deciding what is feasible in that environment
and adapting interventions that have been shown effective in other
clinical settings. Results from such studies will be used.
David Fiellin recommended using current mechanisms like the
Robert Wood Johnson Clinical Scholars program to train physicians
in methodology, clinical epidemiology, and health services research
so that review committees will include members who are
knowledgeable about the ED setting and clinical research.
Hargarten endorsed that idea, but added that there was little
funding for training in clinical research in emergency
medicine.
Gentilello agreed that lack of funding was a problem. Many young
surgeons become interested in alcohol interventions and write
grants, but when their studies are not funded, they lose interest
and move on to other subjects.
Ronald Maio cautioned that we should not abandon the randomized,
controlled trial (RCT). Gentilello's results had a powerful impact
on trauma surgeons because his study was an RCT. When we adapt
proven interventions to new settings, we change many factors so we
need to have an RCT. He recalled the 1970s, when many ED procedures
were adapted for use in the field by EMS without appropriate
evaluation. Now, it is difficult to justify many of those changes.
Regarding collaboration, he mentioned that partnering with
specialists in substance abuse gave him a greater understanding of
that specialty and increased the quality and credibility of
subsequent proposals. He said an NIAAA fellowship is one way of
getting further training.
Daniel Pollock wondered how we could use research as a force for
positive change in the clinical setting. He recounted that
Gentilello's goal for research was to modify interventions that
work in other settings for use in EDs rather than creating new
ones. He asked what types of outcomes would indicate successful
adaptation. Would they be patient outcomes or process measures?
Gentilello replied that the outcome depends on the audience. For
addiction specialists or psychiatrists, an outcome of reduced
drinking would probably be appropriate. Surgeons would probably be
influenced more by an outcome of reduced readmissions to the trauma
service. He surmised, therefore, that reduction in recidivism might
be a suitable outcome for emergency physicians.
Pollock asked how to differentiate that type of study from doing
a clinical trial.
Gentilello suggested that clinical trials are important because
they change practice. He thought a successful multi-center trial
could lead to the creation of a standard of care.
Edward Bernstein observed that one site cannot address all the
questions raised at this conference. He suggested that National
Alcohol Screening Day, an NIAAA-sponsored event, is an opportunity
for EDs in many institutions to collaborate in evaluating the AUDIT
screening instrument in the ED. It could be the first step toward
multi-center studies. He also believed that research should have
policy implications and that funding sources should require this
applicability. He suggested that NIAAA reclaim indirect grant costs
from institutions that did not implement positive findings from
their research.
Richard Ries responded to Bernstein's indirect cost proposal by
endorsing a doubling of indirect costs for institutions that
adopted positive findings as standard operating procedures after
the grant period was over. This would reward institutions for
putting clinical preventive services into practice. He reasoned we
should prefer motivational strategies. He observed concern during
the conference that control groups in intervention studies get much
alcohol-related assessment, which can act as an intervention. He
also agreed with Gentilello that decreased alcohol intake might not
be as important an outcome to ED staff as decreased re-visits to
the ED. Since brief interventions only lead to modest changes in
alcohol intake, perhaps studies should focus on re-injury or health
care use as the primary outcome. Then follow-up interviews would
have to do less alcohol intake assessment, and that would mean less
intervention effect on the control group.
Gentilello concurred, commenting that insurance claims data can
be a useful source of follow-up data, as can a simple phone call to
inquire whether a patient has returned to the doctor recently.
Cheryl Cherpitel related difficulties as a non-MD publishing in
medical journals. She wondered if articles by non-MDs would be
taken seriously by physicians who work in clinical areas. If they
would, medical journals might need to be educated to accept
articles from non-MDs. If non-MD, alcohol methodologists could
publish more easily in these journals, they could have a bigger
impact on practices in the ED.
Gentilello remarked that the attitudes of reviewers for surgical
journals vary considerably. He once submitted an article with 95%
confidence intervals and it was rejected because it had no p
values. He related that his alcohol studies used to be returned
without being reviewed. Reviewers have become more accepting. They
no longer require him to strike any references that show alcohol
treatment is effective. He believes that trauma research requires
multi-disciplinary input and that research by non-MDs is taken
seriously. However, getting that work published requires
persistence. Submitting this work helps educate editors and
reviewers.
Hargarten observed that the impediments to publishing seem to be
lessening, and that the work of Cherpitel and others is vital.
Soderstrom noted that large grants provide a great deal of data.
Papers that are clinically applicable to functioning practice in
the emergency department and the trauma center belong in those
journals. He asserted that papers on methodology or more complex
areas need to be included in other appropriate journals.
Brewer commented that having a paper published is different from
having an impact on clinical practice. Most patients in emergency
departments are seen in non-academic centers. Physicians in these
environments may doubt the applicability of research done in
academic centers. He suggested we need research on how to get
physicians to screen in the emergency department. One of the ways
we get physicians to do this is to get JCAHO to require it.
Daniel Hungerford observed that the Richmond-Kotelchuck model
suggests that changes in practice result from effort applied to all
three elements of the model-political will, social strategy, and
knowledge base. It might seem that research activities apply only
to the knowledge base aspect of the model. However, important
research activities need to be carried out in all three elements of
the model.
Robert Woolard favored continuing intervention research in EDs.
He believed that the realities of our practice settings help drive
the development of new ways of delivering counseling, for example,
computer-based methods. While emergency physicians may not have the
time or interest, the patients do. He suggested that research in
trauma centers and EDs can help alcohol researchers learn more
about the interventions they have already developed and can even
lead to novel interventions.



